


Network Working Group                                         S. Farrell
Internet-Draft                                    Trinity College Dublin
Intended status: BCP                                       H. Tschofenig
Expires: May 17, 2014                                  November 13, 2013


                   Pervasive Monitoring is an Attack
                  draft-iab-iesg-perpass-attack-00.txt

Abstract

   The IETF has consensus that pervasive monitoring is an attack that
   should be mitigated via the design of protocols, where possible.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 17, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.






Farrell & Tschofenig      Expires May 17, 2014                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Pervasive Monitoring is an Attack      November 2013


1.  It's an Attack

   The technical plenary of IETF 88 [IETF88Plenary] discussed pervasive
   monitoring and participants strongly agreed that this was an attack
   and one that should be mitigated where possible via the design of
   protocols that make pervasive monitoring significantly more expensive
   or infeasible.  This Best Current Practice (BCP) documents that
   consensus.

   For the purposes of this BCP pervasive monitoring is the widespread
   privacy-invasive gathering of protocol artefacts including
   application content, protocol meta-data (such as headers) or keys
   used to secure protocols.  Other forms of traffic analysis, for
   example, timing or measuring packet sizes can also be used for
   pervasive monitoring.  A full problem statement with more examples
   and description can be found in [ProblemStatement].  Note that more
   limited-scope monitoring to assist with network management or that is
   REQUIRED in order to operate the network or an application are not
   considered pervasive monitoring.  There is though a clear potential
   for network management mechanisms to be abused as part of pervasive
   monitoring, so this tension needs careful consideration in protocol
   design.

   The motivation behind pervasive monitoring is not particularly
   relevant for this document, but can include non-targetted nation-
   state surveillance.  Equally, one can envisage non-nation-state
   actors using similar techniques for criminal or legal but privacy-
   unfriendly purposes.

   There are various ways in which IETF protocols can be designed in
   order to mitigate pervasive monitoring, but those will change over
   time as mitigation and attack techniques develop and so are not
   described here.  This BCP simply records the consensus to design
   protocols so as to mitigate the attack.


2.  Security Considerations

   This BCP is all about privacy.  More information about the
   relationship between security and privacy threats can be found in
   [RFC6973].  Section 5.1.1 of [RFC6973] specifically addresses
   surveillance as a combined security-privacy threat.


3.  IANA Considerations

   There are none.  We hope the RFC editor deletes this section before
   publication.



Farrell & Tschofenig      Expires May 17, 2014                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Pervasive Monitoring is an Attack      November 2013


4.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank the participants of the IETF 88 technical
   plenary for their feedback.  Additionally, we would like to thank all
   those who contributed to their suggestions on how to improve Internet
   security on various IETF mailing lists, such as the ietf@ietf.org and
   the perpass@ietf.org lists.


5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [IETF88Plenary]
              IETF, "IETF 88 Plenary Meeting Materials",  URL:
              https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/88/materials.html,
              Nov 2013.

   [ProblemStatement]
              Richard Barnes, "Pervasive Monitoring: Problem Statement",
               URL: To-Be-Published, Nov 2013.

5.2.  Informative References

   [RFC6973]  Cooper, A., Tschofenig, H., Aboba, B., Peterson, J.,
              Morris, J., Hansen, M., and R. Smith, "Privacy
              Considerations for Internet Protocols", RFC 6973,
              July 2013.


Appendix A.  IAB and IESG members

A.1.  IAB Members at the Time of Approval

   Internet Architecture Board Members at the time this document was
   approved were:

   o  Bernard Aboba

   o  Jari Arkko

   o  Marc Blanchet

   o  Ross Callon

   o  Alissa Cooper





Farrell & Tschofenig      Expires May 17, 2014                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Pervasive Monitoring is an Attack      November 2013


   o  Eliot Lear

   o  Joel Halpern

   o  Russ Housley

   o  Xing Li

   o  Erik Nordmark

   o  Andrew Sullivan

   o  Dave Thaler

   o  Hannes Tschofenig

A.2.  IESG Members at the Time of Approval

   Internet Engineering Steering Group Members at the time this document
   was approved were:

   o  Jari Arkko

   o  Barry Leiba

   o  Pete Resnick

   o  Brian Haberman

   o  Ted Lemon

   o  Benoit Claise

   o  Joel Jaeggli

   o  Gonzalo Camarillo

   o  Richard Barnes

   o  Stewart Bryant

   o  Adrian Farrel

   o  Stephen Farrell

   o  Sean Turner





Farrell & Tschofenig      Expires May 17, 2014                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Pervasive Monitoring is an Attack      November 2013


   o  Spencer Dawkins

   o  Martin Stiemerling


Authors' Addresses

   Stephen Farrell
   Trinity College Dublin
   Dublin,   2
   Ireland

   Phone: +353-1-896-2354
   Email: stephen.farrell@cs.tcd.ie


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Brussels,
   Belgium

   Phone:
   Email: hannes.tschofenig@gmx.net





























Farrell & Tschofenig      Expires May 17, 2014                  [Page 5]

