


DIME                                                  H. Tschofenig, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                    Nokia Siemens Networks
Intended status:  Standards Track                      February 15, 2013
Expires:  August 19, 2013


           A Keying Database for Diameter End-to-End Security
              draft-tschofenig-dime-keying-database-00.txt

Abstract

   This specification discusses requirements and architectural aspect
   for providing Diameter end-to-end security at the level of individual
   Attribute Value Pairs.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 19, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





Tschofenig               Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Keying Database           February 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Conceptual Keying Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14






































Tschofenig               Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Keying Database           February 2013


1.  Introduction

   The Diameter Base specification [1] offers security protection
   between neighboring Diameter peers and mandates that either TLS (for
   TCP), DTLS (for SCTP), or IPsec is used.  These security protocols
   offer a wide range of security properties, including entity
   authentication, data-origin authentication, integrity,
   confidentiality protection and replay protection.  They also support
   a large number of cryptographic algorithms, algorithm negotiation,
   and different types of credentials.

   In the meanwhile Diameter had received a lot of deployment interest
   and the need for protecting Diameter AVPs between non-neighboring
   nodes has been created.  The requirements for Diameter end-to-end
   security at the level of individual AVPs is provided in TBD.

   This document describes a conceptual model for a keying database as
   it would be used by a Diameter node to determine what AVPs to
   protect, what keys and algorithms to use.  It follows a similar
   spirit as IPsec [4] and for routing protocol [5].  On the receiving
   side it allows the receiving node to create the select the
   appropriate security association for verifying the protected AVPs.





























Tschofenig               Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Keying Database           February 2013


2.  Terminology

   The key words 'MUST', 'MUST NOT', 'REQUIRED', 'SHALL', 'SHALL NOT',
   'SHOULD', 'SHOULD NOT', 'RECOMMENDED', 'MAY', and 'OPTIONAL' in this
   specification are to be interpreted as described in [2].














































Tschofenig               Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Keying Database           February 2013


3.  Conceptual Keying Database

   Diameter nodes maintain different types of databases, depending on
   their functions.  Examples include the peer table and the routing
   table.  The usage of the end-to-end security mechanisms described in
   this document adds another database to those nodes supporting this
   functionality.

   We describe the keying database in a conceptual way as a table, where
   each row represents a single symmetric or asymmetric key.

   The columns that the table consists of are listed as follows:

   KeyName:  The KeyName is a string identifying the key.  On the
      sender-side it provides information about what key to use for
      applying integrity and/or confidentiality protection.  On the
      receiver-side this value provides information about the key to use
      for verification.

   DestinationRealm:  The DestinationRealm provides information for the
      sending host to decide what messages to protect.  This selector
      field contains information about the designation realm.  The
      format of a DiameterIdentity.  This field may be empty.

   DestinationHost:  The DestinationHost provides information for the
      sending host to decide what messages to protect.  This selector
      field contains information about the destination host.  The format
      of a DiameterIdentity.  This field may be empty.

   ApplicationID:  The ApplicationID provides information for the
      sending host to decide what messages to protect.  This field
      contains a list of comma separated application id values.  This
      field may be empty.  The value "*" refers to all application ids
      that match the DestinationRealm and/or DestinationHost field.

   AVPCodeList:  The AVPCodeList provides information for the sending
      host to decide what AVPs need to experience integrity, and
      optionally confidentiality protection.  This selector field
      contains a list of AVP codes.  The value "*" indicates that the
      protection covers all AVP fields included in the message.

   KDF:  The KDF field indicates which key derivation function is used
      to generate short-lived keys from a long-lived symmetric key in
      the Key field.  For symmetric keys, when the long-lived shared key
      is intended for direct use, the KDF field is set to "none".  This
      document re-used the KDF algorithm registry established in [5].
      The protocol indicates what (if any) KDFs are valid.  For
      asymmetric algorithm the KDF is left empty.



Tschofenig               Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Keying Database           February 2013


   AlgID:  The AlgID field indicates the cryptographic algorithm used
      with the security protocol.  The algorithm may be an encryption
      algorithm and mode (such as AES-128-CBC), an authentication
      algorithm (such as HMAC-SHA1-96 or AES-128-CMAC), or an algorithm
      applicable to asymmetric cryptography (such as RS256 indicating
      RSA with SHA-256).  If the KDF field contains "none", then a long-
      lived shared secret key is used directly with this algorithm,
      otherwise the derived short-lived symmetric key is used with this
      algorithm.  When the long-lived key is used to generate a set of
      short-lived keys for use with the security protocol, the AlgID
      field identifies a ciphersuite rather than a single cryptographic
      algorithm.

   KeyType:  The KeyType provides information about the type of key
      found in the Key field.  Two values are possible:  "SymmetricKey"
      and "AsymmetricKey".

   Key:  The Key field contains a symmetric or an asymmetric key.  A
      lower-case hexadecimal string is used for representing a symmetric
      key.  For asymmetric keys the NI URI format [3] is used.  The size
      of the Key field depends on the type of key, the selected KDF, and
      the AlgID.  For instance, a KDF=none and AlgID=AES128 requires a
      128-bit symmetric key, which is represented by 32 hexadecimal
      digits.

   Direction:  The Direction field indicates whether this key may be
      used for inbound traffic, outbound traffic, both, or whether the
      key has been disabled and may not currently be used at all.  The
      supported values are "in", "out", "both", and "disabled",
      respectively.

   SendNotBefore:  The NotBefore field specifies the earliest date and
      time in Universal Coordinated Time (UTC) at which this key should
      be considered for use.  The format is YYYYMMDDHHSSZ, where four
      digits specify the year, two digits specify the month, two digits
      specify the day, two digits specify the hour, two digits specify
      the minute, and two digits specify the second.  The "Z" is
      included as a clear indication that the time is in UTC.  This
      field is empty if the key is for immediate use.  If the Direction
      field indicates that the key is used not used for outbound traffic
      then this field is ignored.

   SendNotAfter:  The SendNotAfter field specifies the latest date and
      time at which this key should be considered for use when sending
      messages.  The format is the same as the SendNotBefore field.  If
      the Direction field indicates that the key is used not used for
      outbound traffic then this field is ignored.




Tschofenig               Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Keying Database           February 2013


   RcvNotBefore:  The RcvNotBefore field specifies the earliest date and
      time in Universal Coordinated Time (UTC) at which this key should
      be considered for use when processing received messages.  The
      format is YYYYMMDDHHSSZ, where four digits specify the year, two
      digits specify the month, two digits specify the day, two digits
      specify the hour, two digits specify the minute, and two digits
      specify the second.  The "Z" is included as a clear indication
      that the time is in UTC.  This field is empty if there is no
      restriction regarding the use of the key when processing received
      messages.  If the Direction field indicates that the key is used
      not used for inbound traffic then this field is ignored.

   RcvNotAfter:  The RcvNotAfter field specifies the latest date and
      time at which this key should be considered for use when
      processing received traffic.  The format of this field is
      identical to the format of NotBefore.  If the Direction field
      indicates that the key is used not used for inbound traffic then
      this field is ignored.

   KeyManagement:  Specifies whether a entry was statically configured
      or dynamically discovered.  This field may help to create a new
      key when the existing key is expired.  An empty field indicates a
      statically configured key.  Values are reserved for automated key
      management protocols.



























Tschofenig               Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Keying Database           February 2013


4.  Examples

   This section gives a few examples.  For editorial reasons (i.e., the
   per-line character limit of Internet drafts) a list representation is
   used instead of a table.



   +----------------+                                 +----------------+
   |                |           +----------+          |                |
   |   Diameter     |           |          |          |   Diameter     |
   |   Client       |           | Diameter |          |   Server       |
   |                |---------->| Proxy    |--------->|                |
   |                |           |          |          |                |
   +----------------+           +----------+          +----------------+

   client.example.com        proxy.example.com        server.example.com


               Figure 1: Example Diameter Deployment Setup.

   The first example illustrates an entry in the key table at a Diameter
   client.


   KeyName: abc123
   DestinationRealm:
   DestinationHost: server.example.com
   ApplicationID: *
   AVPCodeList: *
   KDF: none
   AlgID: HMAC-SHA1-96
   KeyType: SymmetricKey
   Key: 617CAA833BEF64D88E45
   Direction: out
   SendNotBefore:
   SendNotAfter: 201302142000Z
   RcvNotBefore:
   RcvNotAfter :
   KeyManagement:


   The second example illustrates the entries of the key database for an
   asymmetric key as stored at the Diameter client.







Tschofenig               Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Keying Database           February 2013


   KeyName: abc123
   DestinationRealm:
   DestinationHost: server.example.com
   ApplicationID: *
   AVPCodeList: *
   KDF: none
   AlgID: RS256
   KeyType: AsymmetricKey
   Key: ni:///sha-256;UyaQV-Ev4rdLoHyJJWCi11OHfrYv9E1aGQAlMO2X_-Q
   Direction: both
   SendNotBefore:
   SendNotAfter: 201302142000Z
   RcvNotBefore:
   RcvNotAfter : 201302142000Z
   KeyManagement:




































Tschofenig               Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Keying Database           February 2013


5.  Security Considerations

   This document focuses on the description of a keying database for
   usage with Diameter to protect AVPs end-to-end.

   It has been recognized in [6] that automated key management is not
   viable in multiple scenarios.  The conceptual database specified in
   this document is designed to accommodate both manual key management
   and automated key management.  A future specification to
   automatically populate rows in the database is envisioned.

   Designers should recognize the warning provided in [6]:

      "Automated key management and manual key management provide very
      different features.  In particular, the protocol associated with
      an automated key management technique will confirm the liveness of
      the peer, protect against replay, authenticate the source of the
      short-term session key, associate protocol state information with
      the short-term session key, and ensure that a fresh short-term
      session key is generated.  Moreover, an automated key management
      protocol can improve the interoperability by including negotiation
      mechanisms for cryptographic algorithms.  These valuable features
      are impossible or extremely cumbersome to accomplish with manual
      key management."



























Tschofenig               Expires August 19, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Keying Database           February 2013


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.
















































Tschofenig               Expires August 19, 2013               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Keying Database           February 2013


7.  Acknowledgments

   I would like to thank the authors of [5] for their work.  This
   document is inspired by their writeup.















































Tschofenig               Expires August 19, 2013               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Keying Database           February 2013


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Fajardo, V., Arkko, J., Loughney, J., and G. Zorn, "Diameter
        Base Protocol", RFC 6733, October 2012.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [3]  Farrell, S., Kutscher, D., Dannewitz, C., Ohlman, B., Keraenen,
        A., and P. Hallam-Baker, "Naming Things with Hashes",
        draft-farrell-decade-ni-10 (work in progress), August 2012.

8.2.  Informative References

   [4]  Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the Internet
        Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005.

   [5]  Housley, R., Polk, T., Hartman, S., and D. Zhang, "Database of
        Long-Lived Symmetric Cryptographic Keys",
        draft-ietf-karp-crypto-key-table-05 (work in progress),
        February 2013.

   [6]  Bellovin, S. and R. Housley, "Guidelines for Cryptographic Key
        Management", BCP 107, RFC 4107, June 2005.

























Tschofenig               Expires August 19, 2013               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Keying Database           February 2013


Author's Address

   Hannes Tschofenig (editor)
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Linnoitustie 6
   Espoo  02600
   Finland

   Phone:  +358 (50) 4871445
   Email:  Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net
   URI:    http://www.tschofenig.priv.at








































Tschofenig               Expires August 19, 2013               [Page 14]

