



Network Working Group                                      H. Tschofenig
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Informational                                  J. Arkko
Expires: April 28, 2015
                                                               D. Thaler

                                                            D. McPherson

                                                        October 25, 2014


        Architectural Considerations in Smart Object Networking
               draft-iab-smart-object-architecture-06.txt

Abstract

   The term "Internet of Things" (IoT) denotes a trend where a large
   number of embedded devices employ communication services offered by
   the Internet protocols.  Many of these devices, often called "smart
   objects" are not directly operated by humans, but exist as components
   in buildings or vehicles, or are spread out in the environment.
   Following the theme "Everything that can be connected will be
   connected", engineers and researchers designing smart object networks
   need to decide how to achieve this in practice.

   This document offers guidance to engineers designing Internet
   connected smart objects.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 28, 2015.







Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Smart Object Communication Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  Device-to-Device Communication Pattern  . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Device-to-Cloud Communication Pattern . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.3.  Device-to-Gateway Communication Pattern . . . . . . . . .   7
     2.4.  Back-end Data Sharing Pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   3.  Re-Use Internet Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   4.  The Deployed Internet Matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   5.  Design for Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   7.  Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   9.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   10. IAB Members at the Time of This Writing . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   11. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22

1.  Introduction

   RFC 6574 [RFC6574] refers to smart objects as devices with
   constraints on energy, bandwidth, memory, size, cost, etc.  This is a
   fuzzy definition, as there is clearly a continuum in device
   capabilities and there is no hard line to draw between devices that
   can run Internet Protocols and those that can't.

   Interconnecting smart objects with the Internet enables exciting new
   use cases and products.  An increasing number of products put the
   Internet Protocol suite on smaller and smaller devices and offer the
   ability to process, visualize, and gain insight from the collected
   sensor data.  The network effect can be increased if the data
   collected from many different devices can be combined.



Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   Developing embedded systems is a complex task, and designers must
   make a number of design decisions such as:

   o  How long is the device designed to operate?

   o  How does it interact with the physical world?  Is it a sensor or
      actuator or both?

   o  How many "owners" does it have?  One?  Many?  Is the owner likely
      to change over the lifetime of the device?

   o  Is it continuously powered?  Intermittently powered?  Does it
      sleep?

   o  Is it connected to a network, and if so, how?

   o  Will it be physically accessible for direct maintenance after
      deployment?  How does that affect the security model?

   While developing embedded systems is itself a complex task, designing
   Internet-connected smart objects is even harder since it requires
   expertise with Internet protocols in addition to software programming
   and hardware skills.  To simplify the development task, and thereby
   to lower the cost of developing new products and prototypes, we
   believe that re-use of prior work is essential.  Therefore, we
   provide high-level guidance on the use of Internet technology for the
   development of smart objects, and connected systems in general.

   Utilize Existing Design Patterns

      Design patterns are generally reusable solutions to a commonly
      occurring design problem (see [Gamma] for more discussion).
      Existing smart object deployments show communication patterns that
      can be re-used by engineers with the benefit of lowering the
      design effort.  As discussed in the sections below, individual
      patterns also have an implication on the required interoperability
      between the different entities.  Depending on the desired
      functionality, already existing patterns can be re-used and
      adjusted.  Section 2 talks about various communication patterns.

   Re-Use Internet Protocols

      Most smart object deployments can make use of the already
      standardized Internet protocol suite.  The Internet protocols can
      be applied to almost any environment due to their generic design,
      and typically offer plenty of potential for re-configuration,
      which allows them to be tailored for the specific needs.
      Section 3 discusses this topic.



Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   The Deployed Internet matters

      When connecting smart objects to the Internet, take existing
      deployment into consideration to avoid unpleasant surprises.
      Assuming an ideal, clean-slate deployments is, in many cases, far
      too optimistic since the already deployed infrastructure is
      convenient to use.  In Section 4 we highlight the importance of
      this topic.

   Design for Change

      The Internet infrastructure, the applications and preferred
      building blocks evolve over time.  Especially long-lived smart
      object deployments need to take this change into account and
      Section 5 is dedicated to that topic.

2.  Smart Object Communication Patterns

   This section illustrates a number of communication patterns utilized
   in the smart object environment.  It is possible that more than one
   pattern can be applied at the same time in a product.  Developers re-
   using those patterns will benefit from the experience of others as
   well as from documentation, source code, and available products.

2.1.  Device-to-Device Communication Pattern

   Figure 1 illustrates a communication pattern where two devices
   developed by different manufacturers are desired to interoperate and
   communicate directly.  To pick an example from [RFC6574], consider a
   light bulb switch that talks to a light bulb with the requirement
   that each may be manufactured by a different company, represented as
   manufacturer A and B.  Other cases can be found with fitness
   equipment, such as heart-rate monitors and cadence sensors.


















Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


                        _,,,,    ,,,,
                       /     -'``    \
                      |  Wireless    |
                      \  Network     |
                      /               \
    ,''''''''|       /                 .       ,''''''''|
    | Light  | ------|------------------\------| Light  |
    | Bulb   |        .                 |      | Switch |
    |........'         `'-              /      |........'
                          \      _-...-`
    Manufacturer           `. ,.'              Manufacturer
        A                    `                      B

             Figure 1: Device-to-Device Communication Pattern

   In order to fulfill the promise that devices from different
   manufacturers are able to communicate out-of-the-box, these vendors
   need to agree on the protocol stack.  They need to make decisions
   about the following protocol design aspects:

   o  Which physical layer(s) should be supported?  Does it use low
      power radio technologies (e.g., Bluetooth Smart, IEEE 802.15.4)?

   o  Can devices be IPv6-only, or must they also support IPv4 for
      legacy/backward compatibility reasons?  What IPv4-IPv6 transition
      technologies are needed?

   o  Which IP address configuration mechanism(s) are integrated into
      the device?

   o  Which communication architectures shall be supported?  Which
      devices are constrained and what are those constraints?  Is there
      a classical client-server model or rather a peer-to-peer model?

   o  Is there a need for a service discovery mechanism to allow users
      to discover light bulbs they have in their home or office?

   o  Which transport-layer protocol is used for conveying the sensor
      readings/sensor commands? (e.g., UDP)

   o  Which application-layer protocol is used? (for example, CoAP)

   o  What information model is used for expressing the different light
      levels?

   o  What data model is used to encode information?  (See RFC 3444
      [RFC3444]) for a discussion about the difference between data
      models and information models.)?



Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   o  Finally, security and privacy require careful thought.  This
      includes questions like: what are the security threats?  What
      security services need to be provided to deal with the identified
      threats?  Where do the security credentials come from?  At what
      layer(s) in the protocol stack should the security mechanism(s)
      reside?  What privacy implications are caused by various design
      decisions?

   This list is not meant to be exhaustive but aims to illustrate that
   for every usage scenario many design decisions will have to be made
   in order to accommodate the constrained nature of a specific device
   in a certain usage scenario.  Standardizing such a complete solution
   to accomplish a full level of interoperability between two devices
   manufactured by different vendors takes time but there are obvious
   rewards for end customers and vendors.

2.2.  Device-to-Cloud Communication Pattern

   Figure 2 shows a communication pattern for uploading sensor data to
   an application service provider.  Often the application service
   provider (example.com in our illustration) also sells smart objects.
   In that case the entire communication happens internal to the
   provider and no need for interoperability arises.  Still, it is
   useful for example.com to re-use existing specifications to lower the
   design, implementation, testing and development effort.

   While this pattern allows using IP-based communication end-to-end it
   may still lead to silos.  To prevent silos, example.com may allow
   third party device vendors to connect to their server infrastructure
   as well.  For those cases, the protocol interface used to communicate
   with the server infrastructure needs to be made available, and
   various standards are available, such as CoAP, DTLS, UDP, IP, etc. as
   shown in Figure 2.  A frequent concern from end users is that a
   change in the business model (or bankruptcy) of the IoT device/
   service provide might turn the hardware into a brick . Companies
   might consider the possibility to release their source code of the
   IoT device, or to allow other IoT operating systems (plus application
   software) to be installed on the IoT device.

   Similarly, in many situations it is desirable to change which cloud
   service a device connects to, such as when an application service
   provider changes its hosting provider.  Again, standard Internet
   protocols are needed.

   Since the access networks to which various smart objects are
   connected are typically not under the control of the application
   service provider, commonly used radio technologies (such as WLAN,
   wired Ethernet, and cellular radio) together with the network access



Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   authentication technology have to be re-used.  The same applies to
   standards used for IP address configuration.


            .................
            |  Application  |
            |  Service      |
            |  Provider     |
            |  example.com  |
            |_______________|
                _,   .
     HTTP    ,'      `.        CoAP
     TLS   _,'          `.     DTLS
     TCP ,'               `._  UDP
     IP-'                    - IP
    ,'''''''''''''|       ,'''''''''''''''''|
    | Device with |       | Device with     |
    | Temperature |       | Carbon Monoxide |
    | Sensor      |       | Sensor          |
    |.............'       |.................'

              Figure 2: Device-to-Cloud Communication Pattern

2.3.  Device-to-Gateway Communication Pattern

   The device-to-cloud communication pattern, described in Section 2.2,
   is convenient for vendors of smart objects and works well if they
   choose a radio technology that is widely deployed in the targeted
   market, such as IEEE 802.11-based Wifi for smart home use cases.
   Sometimes less widely available radio technologies are needed (such
   as IEEE 802.15.4) or special application layer functionality (e.g.,
   local authentication and authorization) has to be provided, or
   interoperability is needed with legacy, non-IP-based devices.  In
   those cases some form of gateway has to be introduced into the
   communication architecture that bridges between the different
   technologies and performs other networking and security
   functionality.  Figure 3 shows this pattern graphically.  Often,
   these gateways are provided by the same vendor that offers the IoT
   product, for example because of the use of proprietary protocols, to
   lower the dependency on other vendors, or to avoid potential
   interoperability problems.  It is expected that in the future more
   generic gateways will be deployed to lower cost and infrastructure
   complexity for end consumers, enterprises, and industrial
   environments.  Such generic gateways are more likely to exist if IoT
   device designs make use of generic Internet protocols and not require
   application layer gateways that translate one application layer
   protocol to another one.  The use of application layer gateways will




Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   in general lead to a more fragile deployment, as it had been observed
   in the past already with RFC 3724 [RFC3724] and RFC 3238 [RFC3238].

   This communication pattern can frequently be found with smart object
   deployments that require remote configuration capabilities and real-
   time interactions.  The gateway is thereby assumed to be always
   connected to the Internet.


                .................
                |  Application  |
                |  Service      |
                |  Provider     |
                |  example.com  |
                |_______________|
                       |
                       |
                       | IPv4/IPv6
                .................
                |    Local      |
                |   Gateway     |
                |               |
                |_______________|
                  _,         .
     HTTP      ,'              `.         CoAP
     TLS     _,' Bluetooth Smart  `.      DTLS
     TCP   ,'     IEEE 802.11       `._   UDP
     IPv6-'       IEEE 802.15.4         - IPv6/6lo
    ,'''''''''''''|          ,'''''''''''''''''|
    | Device with |          | Device with     |
    | Temperature |          | Carbon Monoxide |
    | Sensor      |          | Sensor          |
    |.............'          |.................'

             Figure 3: Device-to-Gateway Communication Pattern

   If the gateway is mobile, such as when the gateway is a smartphone,
   connectivity between the devices and the internet may be
   intermittent.  This limits the applicability of such a communication
   pattern but is nevertheless very common with wearables and other IoT
   devices that do not need always-on Internet or real-time Internet
   connectivity.  From an interoperability point of view it is worth
   noting that smartphones with their sophisticated software update
   mechanism via app stores allow new functionality to be updated
   regularly at the smartphone and sometimes even at the IoT device.
   With special apps that are tailored to each specific IoT device
   interoperability is mainly a concern with regard to the lower layers
   of the protocol stack, such as the radio interface, and less so at



Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   the application layer (if users are willing to download a new app for
   each IoT device).

   It is also worth pointing out that a gateway allows supporting both
   IPv6 and IPv4 (for compatibility with legacy application service
   providers) externally, while allowing devices to be IPv6-only to
   reduce footprint requirements.  If devices do not have the resources
   to support both IPv4 and IPv6 themselves, being IPv6-only (rather
   than IPv4-only) with a gateway enables the most flexibility, avoiding
   the need to update devices to support IPv6 later, whereas IPv4
   address exhaustion makes it ill-suited to scale to smart object
   networks.  See [RFC6540] for further discussion.

2.4.  Back-end Data Sharing Pattern

   The device-to-cloud pattern often leads to silos; IoT devices upload
   data only to a single application service provider.  However, users
   often demand the ability to export and to analyze data in combination
   with data from other sources.  Hence, the desire for granting access
   to the uploaded sensor data to third parties arises.  This design is
   shown in Figure 4.  This pattern is known from the Web in case of
   mashups and is therefore re-applied to the smart object context.  To
   offer familiarity for developers, typically a RESTful API design in
   combination with a federated authentication and authorization
   technology (like OAuth 2.0 [RFC6749]) is re-used.  While this offers
   re-use at the level of building blocks, the entire protocol stack
   (including the information/data model and RESTful Web APIs) is often
   not standardized.























Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


                                              .................
                                              |  Application  |
                                             .|  Service      |
                                          ,-` |  Provider     |
                                        .`    | b-example.com |
                                     ,-`      |_______________|
                                   .`
             .................  ,-`
             |  Application  |-` HTTPS
             |  Service      |   OAuth 2.0
             |  Provider     |   JSON
             |  example.com  |-,
             |_______________|  '.
                  _,              `',
                ,'                   '.
             _,' CoAP or               `',    .................
           ,'   HTTP                      '.  |  Application  |
         -'                                 `'|  Service      |
      ,''''''''|                              |  Provider     |
      | Light  |                              | c-example.com |
      | Sensor |                              |_______________|
      |........'

                  Figure 4: Backend Data Sharing Pattern

3.  Re-Use Internet Protocols

   When discussing the need for re-use of available standards vs.
   extending or re-designing protocols, it is useful to look back at the
   criteria for success of the Internet.

   RFC 1958 [RFC1958] provides lessons from the early days of the
   Internet and says:

      "The Internet and its architecture have grown in evolutionary
      fashion from modest beginnings, rather than from a Grand Plan",

   and adds:

      "A good analogy for the development of the Internet is that of
      constantly renewing the individual streets and buildings of a
      city, rather than razing the city and rebuilding it."

   Yet because building very small, battery-powered devices is
   challenging, it may be difficult to resist the temptation to build
   solutions tailored to specific applications, or even to re-design
   networks from scratch to suit a particular application.




Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   While developing consensus-based standards in an open and transparent
   process takes longer than developing proprietary solutions, the
   resulting solutions often remain relevant over a longer period of
   time.

   RFC 1263 [RFC1263] considers protocol design strategy and the
   decision to design new protocols or to use existing protocols in a
   non-backward compatible way:

      "We hope to be able to design and distribute protocols in less
      time than it takes a standards committee to agree on an acceptable
      meeting time.  This is inevitable because the basic problem with
      networking is the standardization process.  Over the last several
      years, there has been a push in the research community for
      lightweight protocols, when in fact what is needed are lightweight
      standards.  Also note that we have not proposed to implement some
      entirely new set of 'superior' communications protocols, we have
      simply proposed a system for making necessary changes to the
      existing protocol suites fast enough to keep up with the
      underlying change in the network.  In fact, the first standards
      organization that realizes that the primary impediment to
      standardization is poor logistical support will probably win."

   While [RFC1263] was written in 1991 when the standardization process
   was more lightweight than today, these thoughts remain relevant in
   smart object development.

   Interestingly, a large number of already standardized protocols are
   relevant for smart object deployments.  RFC 6272 [RFC6272], for
   example, made the attempt to identify relevant IETF specifications
   for use in smart grids.

   Still, many commercial products contain proprietary or industry-
   specific protocol mechanisms and researchers have made several
   attempts to design new architectures for the entire Internet system.
   There are several architectural concerns that deserve to be
   highlighted:

   Vertical Profiles

      The discussions at the IAB workshop (see Section 3.1.2 of
      [RFC6574]) revealed the preference of many participants to develop
      domain-specific profiles that select a minimum subset of protocols
      needed for a specific operating environment.  Various
      standardization organizations and industry fora are currently
      engaged in activities of defining their preferred profile(s).
      Ultimately, however, the number of domains where smart objects can




Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


      be used is essentially unbounded.  There is also an ever-evolving
      set of protocols and protocol extensions.

      However, merely changing the networking protocol to IP does not
      necessarily bring the kinds of benefits that industries are
      looking for in their evolving smart object deployments.  In
      particular, a profile is rigid, and leaves little room for
      interoperability among slightly differing, or competing technology
      variations.  As an example, layer 1 through 7 type profiles do not
      account for the possibility that some devices may use different
      physical media than others, and that in such situations a simple
      router could still provide an ability to communicate between the
      parties.

   Industry-Specific Solutions

      The Internet Protocol suite is more extensive than merely the use
      of IP.  Often significant benefits can be gained from using
      additional, widely available, generic technologies, such as the
      Web. Benefits from using these kinds of tools include access to a
      large available workforce, software, and education already geared
      towards employing the technology.

   Tight Coupling

      Many applications are built around a specific set of servers,
      devices, and users.  However, often the same data and devices
      could be useful for many purposes, some of which may not be easily
      identifiable at the time the devices are deployed.

   In addition to the architectural concerns, developing new protocols
   and mechanisms is generally more risky and expensive than reusing
   existing standards, due to the additional costs involved in design,
   implementation, testing, and deployment.  Secondary costs, such as
   training of technical staff and, in the worst case, training of end
   users, can be substantial.

   As a result, while there are some cases where specific solutions are
   needed, the benefits of general-purpose technology are often
   compelling, be it choosing IP over some more specific communication
   mechanism, a widely deployed link-layer (such as wireless LAN) over a
   more specific one, web technology over application specific
   protocols, and so on.

   However, when employing these technologies, it is important to
   embrace them in their entirety, allowing for the architectural
   flexibility that is built into them.  As an example, it rarely makes
   sense to limit communications to on-link or to specific media.



Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   Design your applications so that the participating devices can easily
   interact with multiple other applications.

4.  The Deployed Internet Matters

   Despite the applicability of the Internet Protocols for smart
   objects, picking the specific protocols for a particular use case can
   be tricky.  As the Internet has evolved, certain protocols and
   protocol extensions have become the norm and others have become
   difficult to use in all circumstances.

   Taking into account these constraints is particularly important for
   smart objects, as there is often a desire to employ specific features
   to support smart object communication.  For instance, from a pure
   protocol specification perspective, some transport protocols may be
   more desirable than others.  These constraints apply both to the use
   of existing protocols as well as designing new ones on top of the
   Internet Protocol stack.

   The following list illustrates a few of those constraints, but every
   communication protocol comes with its own challenges.

   In 2005, Fonseca, et al.  [IPoptions] studied the usage of IP
   options-enabled packets in the Internet and found that overall,
   approximately half of Internet paths drop packets with options,
   making extensions using IP options "less ideal" for extending IP.

   In 2010, Honda, et al.  [HomeGateway] tested 34 different home
   gateways regarding their packet dropping policy of UDP, TCP, DCCP,
   SCTP, ICMP, and various timeout behavior.  For example, more than
   half of the tested devices do not conform to the IETF recommended
   timeouts for UDP, and for TCP the measured timeouts are highly
   variable, ranging from less than 4 minutes to longer than 25 hours.
   For NAT traversal of DCCP and SCTP, the situation is poor.  None of
   the tested devices, for example, allowed establishing a DCCP
   connection.

   In 2011, [TCPextensions] tested the behavior of networks with regard
   to various TCP extensions: "From our results we conclude the
   middleboxes implementing layer 4 functionality are very common -- at
   least 25% of paths interfered with TCP in some way beyond basic
   firewalling."

   Extending protocols to fulfill new uses and to add new functionality
   may range from very easy to difficult, as [RFC6709] explains in great
   detail.  A challenge many protocol designers are facing is to ensure
   incremental deployability and interoperability with incumbent
   elements in a number of areas.  In various cases, the effort it takes



Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   to design incrementally deployable protocols has not been taken
   seriously enough at the outset.  RFC 5218 on "What Makes For a
   Successful Protocol?"  [RFC5218] defines wildly successful protocols
   as protocols that are widely deployed beyond their envisioned use
   cases.

   As these examples illustrate, protocol architects have to take
   developments in the greater Internet into account, as not all
   features can be expected to be usable in all environments.  For
   instance, middleboxes [RFC3234] complicate the use of extensions in
   the basic IP protocols and transport-layers.

   RFC 1958 [RFC1958] considers this aspect and says "... the community
   believes that the goal is connectivity, the tool is the Internet
   Protocol, and the intelligence is end to end rather than hidden in
   the network."  This statement is challenged more than ever with the
   perceived need to develop intermediaries interacting with less
   intelligent end devices.  However, RFC 3724 [RFC3724] has this to say
   about this crucial aspect: "One desirable consequence of the end-to-
   end principle is protection of innovation.  Requiring modification in
   the network in order to deploy new services is still typically more
   difficult than modifying end nodes."  Even this statement will become
   challenged, as large numbers of devices are deployed and it indeed
   might be the case that changing those devices is hard.  But RFC 4924
   [RFC4924] adds that a network that does not filter or transform the
   data that it carries may be said to be "transparent" or "oblivious"
   to the content of packets.  Networks that provide oblivious transport
   enable the deployment of new services without requiring changes to
   the core.  It is this flexibility that is perhaps both the Internet's
   most essential characteristic as well as one of the most important
   contributors to its success.

5.  Design for Change

   How to embrace rapid innovation and at the same time accomplish a
   high level of interoperability is one of the key aspects for
   competing in the market place.  RFC 1263 [RFC1263] points out that
   "protocol change happens and is currently happening at a very
   respectable clip.  We simply propose [for engineers developing the
   technology] to explicitly deal with the changes rather keep trying to
   hold back the flood.".

   In [Tussels] Clark, et al. suggest to "design for variation in
   outcome, so that the outcome can be different in different places,
   and the tussle takes place within the design, not by distorting or
   violating it.  Do not design so as to dictate the outcome.  Rigid
   designs will be broken; designs that permit variation will flex under
   pressure and survive.".  The term tussle refers to the process



Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   whereby different parties, which are part of the Internet milieu and
   have interests that may be adverse to each other, adapt their mix of
   mechanisms to try to achieve their conflicting goals, and others
   respond by adapting the mechanisms to push back.

   In order to accomplish this, Clark, et al. suggest to

   1.  Break complex systems into modular parts, so that one tussle does
       not spill over and distort unrelated issues.

   2.  Design for choice to permit the different players to express
       their preferences.  Choice often requires open interfaces.

   The main challenge with the suggested approach is to predict how
   conflicts among the different players will evolve.  Since tussles
   evolve over time, there will be changes to the architecture too.  It
   is certainly difficult to pick the right set of building blocks and
   to develop a communication architecture that will last a long time,
   and many smart object deployments are envisioned to be rather long-
   lived.

   Luckily, the design of the system does not need to be cast in stone
   during the design phase.  It may adjust dynamically since many of the
   protocols allow for configurability and dynamic discovery.  But
   ultimately software update mechanisms may provide the flexibility
   needed to deal with more substantial changes.

   A solid software update mechanism is needed not only for dealing with
   the changing Internet communication environment and for
   interoperability improvements but also for adding new features and
   for fixing security bugs.  This approach may appear to be in conflict
   with classes of severely restricted devices since, in addition to a
   software update mechanism, spare flash and RAM capacity is needed.
   It is, however, a tradeoff worth thinking about since better product
   support comes with a price.

   As technology keeps advancing, the constraints that the technology
   places on devices evolve as well.  Microelectronics became more
   capable as time goes by, often making it possible for new devices to
   be both less expensive and more capable than their predecessors.
   This trend can, however, be in some cases offset by the desire to
   embed communications technology in even smaller and cheaper objects.
   But it is important to design communications technology not just for
   today's constraints, but also tomorrow's.  This is particularly
   important since the cost of a product is not only determined by the
   cost of hardware but also by the cost of not reusing already
   available protocol stacks and software library by developing custom
   solutions.



Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   Software updates are common in operating systems and application
   programs today.  Without them, most devices would pose a latent risk
   to the Internet at large.  Arguably, the JavaScript-based web employs
   a very rapid software update mechanism with code being provided by
   many different parties (e.g., by websites loaded into the browser or
   by smartphone apps).

6.  Security Considerations

   Security is often even more important for smart objects than for more
   traditional computing systems, since interacting directly with the
   physical world can present greater dangers and smart objects often
   operate without autonomously without any human interaction for a long
   time period.  The problem is compounded by the fact that there are
   often fewer resources available in constrained devices to actually
   implement security (e.g., see the discussion of "Class 0 devices" in
   Section 3 of [RFC7228]).  As such, it is critical to design for
   security, taking into account a number of key considerations:

   o  A key part of any smart object design is the problem of how to
      establish trust for a smart object.  Typically, bootstrapping
      trust involves giving the device the credentials it needs to
      operate within a larger network of devices or services.

   o  Smart objects will in many cases be deployed in places where
      additional physical security is difficult or impossible.
      Designers should take into account that any such device can and
      will be compromised by an attacker with direct physical access.
      Thus, trust models should distinguish between devices susceptible
      to physical compromise and devices with some level of physical
      security.  Physical attacks, such as timing, power analysis, and
      glitching, are commonly applied to extract secrets
      [PhysicalAttacks].

   o  Smart objects will in many cases be deployed as collections of
      identical or near identical devices.  Protocols should be designed
      so that a compromise of a single device does not result in
      compromise of the entire collection, especially since the
      compromise of a large number of devices can enable additional
      attacks such as a distributed denial of service.  Sharing secret
      keys across an entire product family is therefore also problematic
      since compromise of a single device might leave all devices from
      that product family vulnerable.

   o  Smart objects will in many cases be deployed in ways that the
      designer never considered.  Designers should either seek to
      minimize the impact of misuse of their systems and devices, or
      implement controls to prevent such misuse where applicable.



Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   o  It is anticipated that smart objects will be deployed with a long
      (e.g., 5-40 year) life-cycle.  Any security mechanism chosen at
      the outset may not be "good enough" for the full lifespan of the
      device.  Thus, long-lived devices should start with good security
      and provide a path to deploy new security mechanisms over the
      lifetime of the device.

   o  Security protocols often rely on random numbers and offering
      randomness in embedded devices is challenging.  For this reason,
      it is important to consider the use of hardware-based random
      number generators during early states of the design process.

   A more detailed security discussion can be found in the report from
   the "Smart Object Security" workshop
   [I-D.gilger-smart-object-security-workshop] that was held prior to
   the IETF meeting in Paris, March 2012, and in the report from the
   National Science Foundation's "Cybersecurity Ideas Lab" workshop
   [NSF] that was held in February 2014.  For example, [NSF] includes,
   among other recommendations, these recommendations specific to the
   Internet of Things:

      "Enhance the Security of the Internet of Things by Identifying
      Enclaves: The security challenges posed by the emerging Internet
      of Things should be addressed now, to prepare before it is fully
      upon us.  By identifying specific use segments, or enclaves,
      Internet of Things infrastructure stakeholders can address the
      security requirements and devise event remediations for that
      enclave."

      "Create a Framework for Managing Software Updates: The Internet of
      Things will challenge our current channels for distributing
      security updates.  An environment must be developed for
      distributing security patches that scales to a world where almost
      everything is connected to the Internet and many things are
      largely unattended."

   Finally, we reiterate that use of standards that have gotten wide
   review can often avoid a number of security issues that could
   otherwise arise.  Section 3.3 of [RFC6574] reminds us about the IETF
   work style regarding security:

      "In the development of smart object applications, as with any
      other protocol application solution, security must be considered
      early in the design process.  As such, the recommendations
      currently provided to IETF protocol architects, such as RFC 3552
      [RFC3552], and RFC 4101 [RFC4101], apply also to the smart object
      space."




Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   In the IETF, security functionality is incorporated into each
   protocol as appropriate, to deal with threats that are specific to
   them.  It is extremely unlikely that there is a one-size-fits-all
   security solution given the large number of choices for the 'right'
   protocol architecture (particularly at the application layer).  For
   this purpose, [RFC6272] offers a survey of IETF security mechanisms
   instead of suggesting a preferred one.

7.  Privacy Considerations

   This document mainly focuses on an engineering audience, i.e., those
   who are designing smart object protocols and architecture.  Since
   there is no value-free design, privacy-related decisions also have to
   be made, even if they are just implicit in the re-use of certain
   technologies.  RFC 6973 [RFC6973] and the threat model in
   [I-D.iab-privsec-confidentiality-threat] were written as guidance
   specifically for that audience and are also applicable to the smart
   object context.

   For those looking at privacy from a deployment point of view, the
   following additional guidelines are suggested:

   Transparency:  Transparency of data collection and processing is key
      to avoid unpleasant surprises for owners and users of smart
      objects.  Users and impacted parties must be put in a position to
      understand what items of personal data concerning them are
      collected and stored, as well for what purposes they are sought.

   Data Collection/Use Limitation:  Smart objects should only store
      personal data that is adequate, relevant and not excessive in
      relation to the purpose(s) for which they are processed.  The use
      of anonymized data should be preferred wherever possible.

   Data Access:  Before deployment starts, it is necessary to consider
      who can access personal data collected by smart objects and under
      which conditions.  Appropriate and clear procedures should be
      established in order to allow data subjects to properly exercise
      their rights.

   Data Security:   Standardized data security measures to prevent
      unlawful access, alteration or loss of smart object data need to
      be defined and deployed.  Robust cryptographic techniques and
      proper authentication frameworks have to be used to limit the risk
      of unintended data transfers or unauthorized access.

   A more detailed treatment of privacy considerations that extend
   beyond engineering can be found in a publication from the Article 29
   Working Party [WP223].



Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.

9.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank the participants of the IAB Smart Object
   workshop for their input to the overall discussion about smart
   objects.

   Furthermore, we would like to thank Mike St. Johns, Jan Holler,
   Patrick Wetterwald, Atte Lansisalmi, Hannu Flinck, Bernard Aboba,
   Markku Tuohino, Wes George, Robert Sparks, S.  Moonsesamy, Dave
   Crocker, and Steve Crocker in particular for their review comments.

10.  IAB Members at the Time of This Writing

   Jari Arkko
   Mary Barnes
   Marc Blanchet
   Joel Halpern
   Ted Hardie
   Joe Hildebrand
   Russ Housley
   Eliot Lear
   Xing Li
   Erik Nordmark
   Andrew Sullivan
   Dave Thaler
   Brian Trammell

11.  Informative References

   [Gamma]    Gamma, E., "Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-
              Oriented Software", 1995.

   [HomeGateway]
              Eggert, L., "An experimental study of home gateway
              characteristics, In Proceedings of the '10th annual
              conference on Internet measurement'", 2010.

   [I-D.gilger-smart-object-security-workshop]
              Gilger, J. and H. Tschofenig, "Report from the 'Smart
              Object Security Workshop', March 23, 2012, Paris, France",
              draft-gilger-smart-object-security-workshop-03 (work in
              progress), September 2014.





Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   [I-D.iab-privsec-confidentiality-threat]
              Barnes, R., Schneier, B., Jennings, C., Hardie, T.,
              Trammell, B., Huitema, C., and D. Borkmann,
              "Confidentiality in the Face of Pervasive Surveillance: A
              Threat Model and Problem Statement", draft-iab-privsec-
              confidentiality-threat-00 (work in progress), September
              2014.

   [IPoptions]
              Fonseca, R., Porter, G., Katz, R., Shenker, S., and I.
              Stoica, "IP options are not an option, Technical Report
              UCB/EECS", 2005.

   [NSF]      National Science Foundation, "Interdisciplinary Pathwards
              towards a More Secure Internet: A report on the NSF-
              sponsored Cybersecurity Ideas Lab held in Arlington,
              Virginia on February 10-12, 2014", 2014.

   [PhysicalAttacks]
              Koeune, F. and F. Standaert, "A Tutorial on Physical
              Security and Side-Channel Attacks, in Foundations of
              Security Analysis and Design III: FOSAD 2004/2005 Tutorial
              Lectures, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 3655, pp
              78-108", September 2005.

   [RFC1263]  O'Malley, S. and L. Peterson, "TCP Extensions Considered
              Harmful", RFC 1263, October 1991.

   [RFC1958]  Carpenter, B., "Architectural Principles of the Internet",
              RFC 1958, June 1996.

   [RFC3234]  Carpenter, B. and S. Brim, "Middleboxes: Taxonomy and
              Issues", RFC 3234, February 2002.

   [RFC3238]  Floyd, S. and L. Daigle, "IAB Architectural and Policy
              Considerations for Open Pluggable Edge Services", RFC
              3238, January 2002.

   [RFC3444]  Pras, A. and J. Schoenwaelder, "On the Difference between
              Information Models and Data Models", RFC 3444, January
              2003.

   [RFC3552]  Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552, July
              2003.






Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   [RFC3724]  Kempf, J., Austein, R., and IAB, "The Rise of the Middle
              and the Future of End-to-End: Reflections on the Evolution
              of the Internet Architecture", RFC 3724, March 2004.

   [RFC4101]  Rescorla, E. and IAB, "Writing Protocol Models", RFC 4101,
              June 2005.

   [RFC4924]  Aboba, B. and E. Davies, "Reflections on Internet
              Transparency", RFC 4924, July 2007.

   [RFC5218]  Thaler, D. and B. Aboba, "What Makes For a Successful
              Protocol?", RFC 5218, July 2008.

   [RFC6272]  Baker, F. and D. Meyer, "Internet Protocols for the Smart
              Grid", RFC 6272, June 2011.

   [RFC6540]  George, W., Donley, C., Liljenstolpe, C., and L. Howard,
              "IPv6 Support Required for All IP-Capable Nodes", BCP 177,
              RFC 6540, April 2012.

   [RFC6574]  Tschofenig, H. and J. Arkko, "Report from the Smart Object
              Workshop", RFC 6574, April 2012.

   [RFC6709]  Carpenter, B., Aboba, B., and S. Cheshire, "Design
              Considerations for Protocol Extensions", RFC 6709,
              September 2012.

   [RFC6749]  Hardt, D., "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework", RFC
              6749, October 2012.

   [RFC6973]  Cooper, A., Tschofenig, H., Aboba, B., Peterson, J.,
              Morris, J., Hansen, M., and R. Smith, "Privacy
              Considerations for Internet Protocols", RFC 6973, July
              2013.

   [RFC7228]  Bormann, C., Ersue, M., and A. Keranen, "Terminology for
              Constrained-Node Networks", RFC 7228, May 2014.

   [TCPextensions]
              Honda, M., Nishida, Y., Greenhalgh, A., Handley, M., and
              H. Tokuda, "Is it Still Possible to Extend TCP? In Proc.
              ACM Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), Berlin,
              Germany", Nov 2011.

   [Tussels]  Clark, D., Wroslawski, J., Sollins, K., and R. Braden,
              "Tussle in Cyberspace: Defining Tomorrow's Internet, In
              Proc. ACM SIGCOMM", 2002.




Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft  Smart Object Architectural Considerations   October 2014


   [WP223]    Article 29 Working Party, "Opinion 8/2014 on the on Recent
              Developments on the Internet of Things", September 2014.

Authors' Addresses

   Hannes Tschofenig
   Austria

   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.priv.at


   Jari Arkko
   Jorvas  02420
   Finland

   Email: jari.arkko@piuha.net


   Dave Thaler
   One Microsoft Way
   Redmond, WA  98052
   US

   Email: dthaler@microsoft.com


   Danny McPherson
   US

   Email: danny@tcb.net




















Tschofenig, et al.       Expires April 28, 2015                [Page 22]
