


Network Working Group                                          M. Hansen
Internet-Draft                                                  ULD Kiel
Intended status: Informational                             H. Tschofenig
Expires: August 28, 2012                          Nokia Siemens Networks
                                                                R. Smith
                                                               JANET(UK)
                                                       February 25, 2012


                          Privacy Terminology
                  draft-iab-privacy-terminology-01.txt

Abstract

   Privacy is a concept that has been debated and argued throughout the
   last few millennia by all manner of people.  Its most striking
   feature is that nobody seems able to agree upon a precise definition
   of what it actually is.  In order to discuss privacy in any
   meaningful way a tightly defined context needs to be elucidated.  The
   specific context of privacy used within this document is that of
   "personal data" for usage in Internet protocols.  Personal data
   refers to any information relating to a data subject; a data subject
   is an identified natural person or a natural person who can be
   identified, directly or indirectly.

   A lot of work within the IETF involves defining protocols that can
   potentially transport (either explicitly or implicitly) personal
   data.  Data minimization is a strategy for privacy protection and
   impacts the design of Internet protocols.  Therefore this document
   aims to establish a basic lexicon around privacy so that IETF
   contributors who wish to discuss privacy considerations within their
   work can do so using terminology consistent across the area.

   Note: This document is discussed at
   https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/ietf-privacy

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any



Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 28, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology and Context  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Identifiability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1.  Anonymity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.2.  Pseudonymity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.3.  Identity Confidentiality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  Unlinkability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Undetectability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17















Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


1.  Introduction

   Privacy is a concept that has been debated and argued throughout the
   last few millennia by all manner of people, including philosophers,
   psychologists, lawyers, and more recently, computer scientists.  Its
   most striking feature is that nobody seems able to agree upon a
   precise definition of what it actually is.  Every individual, every
   group, and every culture have their own different views and
   preconceptions about the concept - some mutually complimentary, some
   distinctly different.  However, it is generally (but not
   unanimously!) agreed that the protection of privacy is "A Good Thing"
   and often, people only realize what it was when they feel that they
   have lost it.

   In order to discuss privacy in any meaningful way a tightly defined
   context needs to be elucidated.  The specific context of privacy used
   within this document is that of "personal data" for usage in Internet
   protocols.  A lot of work within the IETF involves defining protocols
   that can potentially transport personal data and can therefore
   either, by dint of design decisions when creating them, enable either
   privacy protection or result in privacy breaches.  Protocol
   architects often do not assume a specific relationship between the
   identifiers and data elements communicated in protocols and the human
   using the software.  However, a protocol may help or simplify the re-
   identification of a natural person by the choice of their identifiers
   and other state that is established and communicated.  The ability to
   combine information over time and from various sources simplifies the
   re-identification and profiling.

   Work in this area of privacy and privacy protection over the last few
   decades has centered on the idea of data minimization; it uses
   terminologies such as anonymity, pseudonymity, unlinkability, and
   undetectability.  These terms are often used in discussions about the
   privacy properties of systems.

   The objective of data minimization is to minimize the risk of
   misusing data by omitting privacy-relevant information where
   possible.  Data minimization aims to enhance privacy in cases where
   personal data is used since it inherently provides some linkability.
   Other techniques have been proposed and implemented that aim to
   enhance privacy by providing misinformation (inaccurate or erroneous
   information, provided usually without conscious effort to mislead or
   deceive) or disinformation (deliberately false or distorted
   information provided in order to mislead or deceive).  However, these
   techniques are out of scope for this document.

   This document aims to establish a basic lexicon around privacy so
   that IETF contributors who wish to discuss privacy considerations



Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


   within their work (see [I-D.iab-privacy-considerations]) can do so
   using terminology consistent across areas.  Note that it does not
   attempt to define all aspects of privacy terminology, rather it just
   establishes terms to some of the most common ideas and concepts.















































Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


2.  Terminology and Context

   Definition:  Personal data refers to any information relating to a
      data subject.

   Definition:  A data subject is an identified natural person or a
      natural person who can be identified, directly or indirectly.

   Definition:  Observer - A party who acts with malicious intent to
      compromise an information system.  The observer may not only be an
      entity that is external to the analyzed message interaction, such
      as an eavesdropper, but the observer is, in many cases, one of the
      communication partners.  We assume that the observer uses all
      information available to infer (probabilities of) his items of
      interest (IOIs).  These IOIs may be attributes (and their values)
      of personal data, or may be actions such as who sent, or who
      received, which messages.  When necessary for the understanding of
      the definition we qualify the capabilities of the observer in the
      communication architecture.  Note that privacy violations are not
      only caused with malicious intent.  Many of them are, such as a
      lost CDROM containing personal data or an email addressed to
      patients with the addresses in the TO rather than the BCC field,
      outside the realm of the IETF and therefore not considered here.

   Definition:  Initiator and recipient - For two party protocol
      interactions we use the terms initiator and recipient.  The
      initiator starts a communication interaction and the recipient is
      the intended communication endpoint.  This particular terminology
      is used to highlight that many protocols utilize bidirectional
      communication where both ends send and receive data.

   Definition:  The Identity Provider (IdP) is an entity that has a
      relationship with a data subject (usually connected to the
      organisation operating the entity) and is responsible for
      providing authentication and authorisation information to Relying
      Parties (RP).  To facilitate this the entity will usually go
      through a process of verifying the person's identity and issuing
      them a set of credentials.  Note that practically each of these
      functions (identity verification, credential issuing, providing
      authentication assertions, providing authorisation assertions,
      etc) may performed by separate entities; for the purposes of this
      document, however, we assume a single entity is performing all of
      them, without loss of generality.








Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


   Definition:  The Relying Party (RP) is an entity that relies on
      authentication and authorisation provided by an identity provider
      regarding a person, typically to process a transaction or grant
      access to information or a system.















































Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


3.  Identifiability

   An identity is any subset of attribute values of an individual person
   which sufficiently identifies this individual person within a given
   context.  So usually there is no such thing as "the identity", but
   several of them.

   The following sub-sections define terms around different ways of
   avoiding identifiability.

3.1.  Anonymity

   Definition:  Anonymity of a subject means that the observer cannot
      sufficiently identify the subject within a set of subjects, the
      anonymity set.

   To enable anonymity of a subject, there always has to be an
   appropriate set of subjects with potentially the same attributes.
   The set of all possible subjects is known as the anonymity set, and
   membership of this set may vary over time.

   The set of possible subjects depends on the knowledge of the
   observer.  Thus, anonymity is relative with respect to the observer.
   Therefore, an initiator may be anonymous (initiator anonymity) only
   within a set of potential initiators - their initiator anonymity set
   - which itself may be a subset of all subjects who may send a
   message.  Conversely a recipient may be anonymous (receipient
   anonymity) only within a set of potential receipients - their
   receipient anonymity set.  Both anonymity sets may be disjoint, may
   overlap, or may be the same.

      As an example consider RFC 3325 (P-Asserted-Identity, PAI)
      [RFC3325], an extension for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP),
      that allows subjects, such as a VoIP caller, to instruct an
      intermediary he or she trusts not to populate the SIP From header
      field with its authenticated and verified identity.  The recipient
      of the call, as well as any other entity outside the data
      subjects's trust domain, would therefore only learn that the SIP
      message (typically a SIP INVITE) was sent with a header field
      'From: "Anonymous" <sip:anonymous@anonymous.invalid>' rather than
      the subject's address-of-record, which is typically thought of as
      the "public address" of the user, i.e., the data subject.  When
      PAI is used the subject becomes anonymous within the initiator
      anonymity set that is populated by every subject making use of
      that specific intermediary.

      Note: This example assumes that other personal data cannot be
      inferred from the other SIP protocol payloads, which is a useful



Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


      assumption to be made in the analysis of one specific protocol
      extension but not for analysis of an entire architecture.

3.2.  Pseudonymity

   Definition:  A pseudonym is an identifier of a subject other than one
      of the subject's real names.  An identifier, as defined in [id],
      is "a lexical token that names entities".

   In the context of IETF protocols almost all identifiers are
   pseudonyms since there is typically no requirement to use real names
   in protocols.  However, in certain scenario it is reasonable to
   assume that real names will be used and it will be worthwhile to
   point out this circumstance.

   For Internet protocols it is important whether protocols allow
   identifiers to be changed without human interaction, what the
   lifetime of the pseudonyms are, to whom they get exposed, how
   subjects are able to control disclosure, and how often they can be
   changed over time (and what the consequences are when they are
   regularly changed).  These aspects are described in
   [I-D.iab-privacy-considerations].

   Achieving anonymity, unlinkability, and maybe undetectability may
   enable the ideal of data minimization.  Unfortunately, it would also
   prevent a certain class of useful two-way communication scenarios.
   Therefore, for many applications, we need to accept a certain amount
   of linkability and detectability while attempting to retain
   unlinkability between the subject and their transactions.  This is
   achieved through appropriate kinds of pseudonymous identifiers.
   These identifiers are then often used to refer to established state
   or are used for access control purposes, see
   [I-D.iab-identifier-comparison].

   The term 'real name' is the antonym to "pseudonym".  There may be
   multiple real names over a lifetime -- in particular legal names.
   For example, a human being may possess the names which appear on
   their birth certificate or on other official identity documents
   issued by the State; for a legal person the name under which it
   operates and which is registered in official registers (e.g.,
   commercial register or register of associations).  A human being's
   real name typically comprises their given name and a family name.
   Note that from a mere technological perspective it cannot always be
   determined whether an identifier of a subject is a pseudonym or a
   real name.

   Additional useful terms are:




Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


   Definition:  The "holder" of the pseudonym is the subject to whom the
      pseudonym refers.

   Definition:  A subject is "pseudonymous" if a pseudonym is used as
      identifier instead of one of its real names.

   Definition:  Pseudonymity is the state of remaining pseudonymous
      through the use of pseudonyms as identifiers.

   initiator pseudonymity is defined as the initiator being
   pseudonymous, recipient pseudonymity is defined as the recipient
   being pseudonymous.

   Anonymity through the use of pseudonyms is stronger where ...

   o  the less personal data of the pseudonym holder can be linked to
      the pseudonym;

   o  the less often and the less context-spanning pseudonyms are used
      and therefore the less data about the holder can be linked;

   o  the more often independently chosen pseudonyms are used for new
      actions (i.e., making them, from an observer's perspective,
      unlinkable)

3.3.  Identity Confidentiality

   Definition:  Identity Confidentiality means that any party other than
      the recipient cannot sufficiently identify the subject within the
      anonymity set.  In comparison to anonymity and pseudonymity,
      identity confidentiality is concerned about eavesdroppers and
      intermediaries.

      As an example consider the network access authentication
      procedures utilizing the Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)
      [RFC3748].  EAP includes an identity exchange where the Identity
      Response is primarily used for routing purposes and selecting
      which EAP method to use.  Since EAP Identity Requests and
      Responses are sent in cleartext, eavesdroppers and intermediaries
      along the communication path between the EAP peer and the EAP
      server can snoop on the identity.  To address such a treat the
      user's identity, as discussed in RFC 4282 [RFC4282], can be hidden
      against these observers with the cryptography support by EAP
      methods.  Certain EAP methods have been designed and identity
      confidentiality has become a recommended design criteria, see
      [RFC4017].  EAP-AKA [RFC4187], for example, protects the EAP
      peer's identity against passive adversaries by utilizing temporal
      identities.  EAP-IKEv2 [RFC5106] is an example of an EAP method



Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


      that offers protection against active observers with regard to the
      subjects' identity.

















































Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


4.  Unlinkability

   Definition:  Unlinkability of two or more Items Of Interest (e.g.,
      subjects, messages, actions, ...) means that within a particular
      set of information, the observer cannot distinguish whether these
      IOIs are related or not (with a high enough degree of probability
      to be useful).

   Unlinkability of two (or more) messages may of course depend on
   whether their content is protected against the observer.  In the
   cases where this is not true, messages may only be unlinkable if we
   assume that the observer is not able to infer information about the
   initiator or receipient from the message content itself.  It is worth
   noting that even if the content itself does not betray linkable
   information explicitly, deep semantical analysis of a message
   sequence can often detect certain characteristics which link them
   together, e.g., similarities in structure, style, use of some words
   or phrases, consistent appearance of some grammatical errors, etc.

   The unlinkability property can be considered as a more "fine-grained"
   version of anonymity since there are many more relations where
   unlinkability might be an issue than just the relation of "anonymity"
   between subjects and IOIs.  As such, it may sometimes be necessary to
   explicitly state to which attributes anonymity refers to (beyond the
   subject to IOI relationship).  An observer might get to know
   information on linkability of various messages while not necessarily
   reducing anonymity of the particular subject.  As an example an
   observer, in spite of being able to link all encrypted messages in a
   set of transactions, does not learn the identify of the subject who
   is the source of the transactions.

   There are several items of terminology highly related to
   unlinkability:

   Definition:  We use the term "profiling" to mean learning information
      about a particular subject by linking together separate pieces of
      information referring to the same data subject.  For example, if
      an observer concludes that a subject plays a specific computer
      game, reads specific news article on a website, and uploads
      certain videos, then the subject's activities have been profiled,
      even if the observer is unable to identify that specific subject.

   Definition:  "Relationship anonymity" of a pair of subjects means
      that initiator and receipient (or each recipient in case of
      multicast) are unlinkable.  The classical MIX-net [Chau81] without
      dummy traffic is one implementation with just this property: The
      observer sees who sends messages when, and who receives messages
      when, but cannot figure out who is sending messages to whom.



Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


   Definition:  "Recipient identity anonymity" refers to the property
      where the recipient's identity is kept anonymous from the
      initiator.  For example, consider an identity management scenario,
      which is a three party scenario, where an identity provider, who
      manages the data subjects credentials and attributes, shall not
      observe activities of data subjects throughout the Internet as
      they interact with relying parties.

   Definition:  "initiator identity anonymity" refers to the property
      where the initiator remains anonymous towards the recipient.
      Within the identity management scenario the initiator role
      corresponds to the identity provider and the recipients are the
      relying parties.  As such, with this property a relying party will
      not determine the identity provider used by a data subject for a
      given transaction.

   Definition:  "Unlinkable sessions" is the property of a protocol that
      prevents an eavesdropper from associating one protocol run to an
      earlier one.  This term is useful for cases where a sequence of
      interactions between an initiator and a recipient is necessary for
      the application logic rather than a single-shot message.  We refer
      to this as a session.  When doing an analysis with respect to
      unlinkability we compare this session to a sequence of sessions to
      determine whether or not they are linkable.

   Definition:  We use the term "fingerprinting" to refer to any
      parameter (or set of parameters) that an observer can observe for
      the purpose of re-recognition.  Fingerprinting is a form of
      tracking by associating activities of a communication software at
      different times, potentially with different communication
      partners, but without explicitly sharing state information (as it
      would be the case with cookies [RFC6265]).  For example, the
      Panopticlick project by the Electronic Frontier Foundation uses
      parameters an HTTP-based Web browser shares with sites it visits
      to determine the uniqueness of the browser [panopticlick].
















Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


5.  Undetectability

   Definition:  Undetectability of an item of interest (IOI) means that
      the observer cannot sufficiently distinguish whether it exists or
      not.

   In contrast to anonymity and unlinkability, where the IOI is
   protected indirectly through protection of the IOI's relationship to
   a subject or other IOI, undetectability is the direct protection of
   an IOI.  For example, undetectability can be regarded as a possible
   and desirable property of steganographic systems.

   If we consider messages as IOIs, then undetectability means that
   messages are not sufficiently discernible from, e.g., "random noise".





































Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


6.  Acknowledgments

   Parts of this document utilizes content from [anon_terminology],
   which had a long history starting in 2000 and whose quality was
   improved due to the feedback from a number of people.  The authors
   would like to thank Andreas Pfitzmann for his work on an earlier
   draft version of this document.

   Within the IETF a number of persons had provided their feedback to
   this document.  We would like to thank Scott Brim, Marc Linsner,
   Bryan McLaughlin, Nick Mathewson, Eric Rescorla, Alissa Cooper, Scott
   Bradner, Nat Sakimura, Bjoern Hoehrmann, David Singer, Dean Willis,
   Christine Runnegar, Lucy Lynch, Trend Adams, Mark Lizar, Martin
   Thomson, Josh Howlett, Mischa Tuffield, S. Moonesamy, Ted Hardie,
   Zhou Sujing, Claudia Diaz, and Klaas Wierenga.




































Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


7.  Security Considerations

   This document introduces terminology for talking about privacy within
   IETF specifications.  Since privacy protection often relies on
   security mechanisms then this document is also related to security in
   its broader context.













































Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.
















































Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.iab-privacy-considerations]  Cooper, A., Tschofenig, H., Aboba,
                                     B., Peterson, J., and J. Morris,
                                     "Privacy Considerations for
                                     Internet Protocols",
                                     draft-iab-privacy-considerations-01
                                     (work in progress), October 2011.

   [id]                              "Identifier - Wikipedia",
                                     Wikipedia , URL: http://
                                     en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Identifier,
                                     Dec 2011.

9.2.  Informative References

   [Chau81]                          Chaum, D., "Untraceable Electronic
                                     Mail, Return Addresses, and Digital
                                     Pseudonyms", Communications of the
                                     ACM , 24/2, 84-88, 1981.

   [I-D.iab-identifier-comparison]   Thaler, D., "Issues in Identifier
                                     Comparison for Security Purposes",
                                     draft-iab-identifier-comparison-00
                                     (work in progress), July 2011.

   [RFC3325]                         Jennings, C., Peterson, J., and M.
                                     Watson, "Private Extensions to the
                                     Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
                                     for Asserted Identity within
                                     Trusted Networks", RFC 3325,
                                     November 2002.

   [RFC3748]                         Aboba, B., Blunk, L., Vollbrecht,
                                     J., Carlson, J., and H. Levkowetz,
                                     "Extensible Authentication Protocol
                                     (EAP)", RFC 3748, June 2004.

   [RFC4017]                         Stanley, D., Walker, J., and B.
                                     Aboba, "Extensible Authentication
                                     Protocol (EAP) Method Requirements
                                     for Wireless LANs", RFC 4017,
                                     March 2005.

   [RFC4187]                         Arkko, J. and H. Haverinen,
                                     "Extensible Authentication Protocol



Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


                                     Method for 3rd Generation
                                     Authentication and Key Agreement
                                     (EAP-AKA)", RFC 4187, January 2006.

   [RFC4282]                         Aboba, B., Beadles, M., Arkko, J.,
                                     and P. Eronen, "The Network Access
                                     Identifier", RFC 4282,
                                     December 2005.

   [RFC5106]                         Tschofenig, H., Kroeselberg, D.,
                                     Pashalidis, A., Ohba, Y., and F.
                                     Bersani, "The Extensible
                                     Authentication Protocol-Internet
                                     Key Exchange Protocol version 2
                                     (EAP-IKEv2) Method", RFC 5106,
                                     February 2008.

   [RFC6265]                         Barth, A., "HTTP State Management
                                     Mechanism", RFC 6265, April 2011.

   [anon_terminology]                Pfitzmann, A. and M. Hansen, "A
                                     terminology for talking about
                                     privacy by data minimization:
                                     Anonymity, Unlinkability,
                                     Undetectability, Unobservability,
                                     Pseudonymity, and Identity
                                     Management", URL: http://
                                     dud.inf.tu-dresden.de/literatur/
                                     Anon_Terminology_v0.34.pdf ,
                                     version 034, 2010.

   [panopticlick]                    Eckersley, P., "How Unique Is Your
                                     Web Browser?", Electronig Frontier
                                     Foundation , URL: https://
                                     panopticlick.eff.org/
                                     browser-uniqueness.pdf, 2009.















Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology             February 2012


Authors' Addresses

   Marit Hansen
   ULD Kiel

   EMail: marit.hansen@datenschutzzentrum.de


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Linnoitustie 6
   Espoo  02600
   Finland

   Phone: +358 (50) 4871445
   EMail: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.priv.at


   Rhys Smith
   JANET(UK)

   EMail: rhys.smith@ja.net




























Hansen, et al.           Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 19]

