


Network Working Group                                          J. Morris
Internet-Draft                                                       CDT
Intended status: Informational                             H. Tschofenig
Expires: April 21, 2011                           Nokia Siemens Networks
                                                                B. Aboba
                                                   Microsoft Corporation
                                                             J. Peterson
                                                           NeuStar, Inc.
                                                        October 18, 2010


              Policy Considerations for Internet Protocols
                    draft-morris-policy-cons-00.txt

Abstract

   Without doubt the Internet infrastructure developed far beyond the
   expectations of the original funding agencies, architects,
   developers, and early users.  The society's current use and
   expectations often lead to the need to take the economical and
   political context in which technology is deployed into consideration.

   This document aims to make protocol designers aware of the public
   policy-related questions that may impact standards development.  This
   document contains questions, as opposed to guidelines or strict rules
   that should in all cases be followed.  This document provides a
   framework for identifying and discussing questions of public policy
   concern and serves as an umbrella for related policy documents.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2011.

Copyright Notice




Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Potential Public Policy Concerns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.1.  General Comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.2.  Content Censorship and Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.2.1.  Government Censorship  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.2.2.  Private Control of Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.3.  Discrimination Among Users and Content . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.4.  Competition and Choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.5.  User Consent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.6.  Internationalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     4.7.  Accessibility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     4.8.  Personal Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     4.9.  Privacy vis-a-vis the Government . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   5.  Questions about Technical Characteristics or Functionality . . 16
     5.1.  Bottlenecks, Choke-Points and Access Control . . . . . . . 16
     5.2.  Alteration or Replacement of Content . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     5.3.  Monitoring or Tracking of Usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     5.4.  Retention, Collection, or Exposure of Data . . . . . . . . 17
     5.5.  Persistent Identifiers and Anonymity . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     5.6.  Access by Third Parties  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     5.7.  Discrimination among Users, or among Types of Traffic  . . 18
     5.8.  Internationalization and Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . 18
     5.9.  Innovation, Competition, and End User Choice and
           Control  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23



Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25


















































Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


1.  Introduction

   This document suggests public policy questions that the authors
   believe should be considered and possibly addressed within the IETF
   when it is working on new or revised standards or protocols.  This
   document offers questions to be considered, rather than guidelines to
   be followed.  These questions are somewhat similar to the "Security
   Considerations" section required in IETF documents.

   This document is inspired by and directly modeled on RFC 3426
   [RFC3426], entitled "General Architectural and Policy Considerations"
   and published by the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) in November
   2002.  In RFC 3426, the IAB raises architectural questions that
   should be considered in design decisions, without asserting that
   there are clear guidelines that should be followed in all cases.
   This document attempts to follow in the spirit of RFC 3426 by raising
   questions to be considered without asserting that any particular
   answers must be followed.

   This document is motivated by the recognition that technical design
   decisions made within the IETF and other standards bodies can have
   significant impacts on public policy concerns.  One well known and in
   the meanwhile historical example of this possible impact can be found
   in the standardization efforts around IPv6 on Ethernet networks.
   [RFC2464], published in December 1998, specified that the interface
   identifier of an IPv6 address was constructed in a way that it uses
   the unique MAC address associated with the Ethernet interface
   adapter.  After the publication of RFC 2464, a significant policy
   concern arose because the use of the unique and unchangeable MAC
   address would significantly reduce a user's ability to conduct
   private and/or anonymous communications using IPv6.  The IETF
   responded to those concerns by publishing RFC 3041 [RFC3041] entitled
   "Privacy Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6"
   in January 2001.  Privacy concerns relating this aspect in IPv6 still
   exist today.

   The goal of this document is that potential public policy impacts of
   technical design decisions will be identified and considered during
   the initial design process.  Some would refer to this approach as
   "privacy by design".  This type of policy consideration already
   happens in many cases within the IETF, but not in any systematic way
   or with any assurance that public policy concerns will be identified
   in most cases.  We will provide some examples throught this document.

   The goal of the document is not to suggest that the IETF should "do"
   policy in the sense of intentionally conducting extensive debates on
   public policy issues.  However, many of the actions taken within the
   IETF have an impact on public policy concerns.  This document seeks



Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


   to encourage the IETF to acknowledge those times when a design
   decision might affect a policy concern, so that the community can
   make a reasoned decision on whether and how to address the concern in
   the particular situation.

   Public policy concerns often cannot be avoid: Some beneficial
   technologies might have secondary harmful impacts, and the benefits
   may outweigh the harms.  More generally, some technologies (such as
   those that facilitate government surveillance) might intentionally
   compromise a public concern such as privacy.  Similarly, the inherent
   goal of some technologies (such as those that discriminate among
   traffic to provide assured levels of quality of service) might
   simultaneously be viewed by some as beneficial and by others as
   harmful.

   In all of these cases, there may well be good reasons to develop the
   technology notwithstanding the asserted harms to a policy concern.
   The main goal of this document is simply to suggest that impacts on a
   public concern should not happen without clear recognition of the
   impacts, and without appropriate consideration of whether it is
   possible to minimize harmful impacts while still meeting the design
   requirements.





























Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


2.  Scope

   This document cannot possibly predict and identify all possible
   societal impacts of future IETF protocol and architectural design
   decisions.  It does try, however, to identify a broad range of
   possible public policy impacts that experience suggests are most
   likely to arise.

   There are two broad categories of public policy impacts that this
   document does not seek to cover with any thoroughness.  First, this
   document does not articulate the full range of concerns raised by
   traditional security problems in the network.  The IETF is already
   appropriately focused on security issues, and those in the Security
   Area are well able to identify and articulate the types of technical
   design decisions that can lead to security problems.  Many of the
   privacy concerns highlighted in this document raise related security
   concerns.

   Second, this document does not attempt to identify the enormous range
   of positive societal impacts that flow from network technology.  The
   vast majority of the work of the IETF -- from the introduction of an
   entirely new method of Internet use to the fine tuning of an existing
   routing protocol -- yields concrete and important social benefits.
   This document does not discuss these positive benefits, but takes as
   a given that technology proposals will not advance within the IETF
   unless at least some portion of the community views the proposals as
   beneficial.

   This document is by no means an exhaustive list of public policy
   concerns that relate to the Internet.  This draft has instead focused
   on policy issues that the authors believe are most likely to arise in
   the IETF context.  In addition, the views on public policy varies
   among countries and cultures to a certain degree.


















Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


3.  Terminology

   This document will use a limited number of defined terms, which
   admittedly will not be precisely applicable in all situations:

   TECHNOLOGY shall refer to a technical standard or innovation being
   considered within the IETF, whether it is a "new" technology or
   standard or a modification to an "old" technology or standard.

   END USER shall refer to the user at one or the other end of a network
   communication, or an automated or intelligent proxy for a user
   located at the end of the communication.  Thus, a concern over, for
   example, the privacy of the End User would be applicable in cases
   where a client-side application communicated on behalf of an End
   User.  In some contexts, a corporation or other organized collection
   of human users might stand in the role of an End User.  In some but
   not all contexts, a communication might be from one End User to
   another End User; in other context, a communication might be between
   a Service Provider (defined below) and an End User.

   ACCESS PROVIDER shall refer to the entity that most directly provides
   network access to an End User or Service Provider.  In the case of
   End Users on the public Internet, a Access Provider will often be an
   Internet Service Provider that provides dedicated or dial-up network
   access.  In other cases a Access Provider might be a company
   providing access to its employees, or a university providing access
   to its students and faculty.

   SERVICE PROVIDER shall refer to an entity (human, corporate or
   institutional) that provides or offers services or content to End
   Users over the network (regardless of whether charges are sought for
   such services or content).  Thus, for example, a web site would be
   viewed as a Service Provider.

   A given entity (such as a company offering content on the web) might
   be viewed as an Access Provider (vis-a-vis its employees), as an End
   User (vis-a-vis the ISP from which it obtains network access), and as
   a Service Provider (vis-a-vis End Users elsewhere on the Internet).

   TRANSIT PROVIDERS shall refer to one or more entities that transport
   communications between the Access Providers at either end of a
   communication.  Transit Providers are often thought to transport
   packets of communications without regard to their content (other
   than, of course, their destination), but increasingly some Transit
   Providers may handle traffic differently depending on the type of
   traffic.

   THIRD PARTY shall refer to any individual or entity other than End



Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


   Users, Access Providers, Service Providers, and Transit Providers.
   For a given communication, Third Parties could include, for example,
   governments seeking to execute lawful interceptions, hackers seeking
   to interfere with or intercept communications, or in some situations
   entities that provide, under contract, content or functionality to a
   Service Provider (such as, for example, an entity that serves
   advertisements for insertion in a web page).

   In some cases the distinction between a Transit Provider and a Third
   Party may blur, if the Transit Provider manipulates or discriminates
   among traffic based on characteristics such as its content, sender,
   or receiver.  Similarly, the line between a Service Provider and a
   Third Party may blur as more service functions are contracted out.






































Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


4.  Potential Public Policy Concerns

   Below are brief discussions of common categories of public policy
   concern that might be raised by technologies developed by the IETF.
   The discussions are not intended to present comprehensive analyses of
   the policy concern, but are intended to assist in identifying
   situations in which the concern is implicated and should be
   considered.

4.1.  General Comments

   The fundamental design principles of the Internet, including
   openness, interoperability, and the end-to-end principle, have
   themselves been critical contributors to the value of the Internet
   from a public policy perspective.  Thus, as a first rule of promoting
   healthy public policy impacts, the IETF should continue to maintain
   and promote the architectural goals that it has historically pursued.

   Because of this congruence between architectural values and public
   policy values, many of the design considerations in RFC 3426
   [RFC3426], "General Architectural and Policy Considerations" directly
   promote an Internet that is supportive of good public policy values.
   As one of many examples, Section 12.1 of [RFC3426] discusses the
   value of user choice, and quotes [CWSB02] to say that "user
   empowerment is a basic building block, and should be embedded into
   all mechanism whenever possible."  User choice is a fundamental
   public policy concern, discussed more below.

   [CWSB02], titled "Tussle in Cyberspace: Defining Tomorrow's
   Internet," is itself a valuable exploration of the intersection
   between technology design and public policy concerns.  A key premise
   of [CWSB02] is that "different stakeholders that are part of the
   Internet milieu have interests that may be adverse to each other, and
   these parties each vie to favor their particular interests."  Many of
   the "tussles" that [CWSB02] analyzes are situations in which public
   policy considerations should be assessed in making design decisions.
   More broadly, [CWSB02] provides to technology designers a conceptual
   framework that recognizes the existence of "tussles" and seeks to
   accommodate them constructively within a design.

4.2.  Content Censorship and Control

   As used here, the concept of censorship can encompass both
   governmental and private actions.







Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


4.2.1.  Government Censorship

   [Editor's Note: Add more references in an upcoming version of the
   draft.]

   "Censorship" is most commonly thought of as government-imposed
   control or blocking of access to content.  Many believe that as a
   matter of public policy, censorship should be minimized or avoided.
   For example, in May 2003 the Council of Europe stated in its
   "Declaration on freedom of communication on the Internet" that
   "Public authorities should not, through general blocking or filtering
   measures, deny access by the public to information and other
   communication on the Internet, regardless of frontiers."  [COE03].
   But not all censorship is viewed by all as contrary to public policy.
   In November 2002 in [COE02], the same Council of Europe specifically
   endorsed government regulation of "hate speech" on the Internet.

   Harder to identify are technologies not intended for content control
   but which can be used to censor or restrict access to content.  Any
   technology that creates or permits bottlenecks or choke-points in the
   network, through which significant traffic must pass, increases the
   risk of censorship.  Governments seeking to censor content or
   restrict access to the Internet will exploit network bottlenecks
   (albeit often bottlenecks created by network topology not technology
   standards).

4.2.2.  Private Control of Content

   Governments are not the only entities that attempt to restrict the
   content to which Internet users have access.  In some cases Access
   Providers (commonly Internet Service Providers) seek to control the
   content available to their customers.  Some do so with full knowledge
   and consent of the customers (to provide, for example, a "family
   friendly" online experience).  Others, however, favor certain content
   (for example, that of contractual business partners) over competing
   content, and do so without the clear understanding of their
   customers.

   Whether such private content control is contrary to public policy
   will turn on a host of specific considerations (including notice and
   alternative choice), but undeniably such content control raises
   policy concerns.  These policy concerns are commonly phrased in terms
   of discrimination among content, and are discussed more fully in the
   next section.







Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


4.3.  Discrimination Among Users and Content

   In a simplistic conception of the early Internet, all traffic of any
   kind was broken into packets and all packets were treated equally
   within the network.  This idea has promoted a broad and strong
   perception of equality within the Internet -- one class of traffic
   will not take priority over other classes, and a lone individual's
   packets will be treated the same as a large corporation's packets.

   Any technology that moves away from this notion of equality -- even
   technologies that are clearly beneficial -- raise significant public
   policy questions, including "who controls the preferential
   treatment," "who qualifies for it," "will it require additional
   expenditure to obtain it," and "how great a disparity will it
   create."

   Thus, for example, quality of service and content distribution
   networks both raise questions about what and who will be favored,
   whether the rough equality of the Internet will be lost, and whether
   the financially strong will come to dominate the Internet and make it
   less useful for the less well off.

   The concern over discrimination addresses both discrimination based
   on identity of user, and on type of traffic.  Content distribution
   networks enable, for example, individual web sites able to afford the
   CDN services to be delivered more quickly than competing web sites
   that are not able to afford such services.  In contrast, a core focus
   of quality of service efforts is on the need to provide enhanced
   levels of service to some types of traffic (e.g., Internet
   telephony).

   Concern about discrimination does not suggest that technologies that
   handle certain categories of traffic more efficiently should never be
   pursued.  The concern, however, may in some cases suggest that an
   efficiency enhancement be structured so as to be available to the
   broadest classes of traffic or users.

4.4.  Competition and Choice

   Critical elements of the Internet's development and success have been
   the ability to create new and innovative uses of the network, the
   relative ease in creating and offering competitive services,
   products, and methods, and the ability of Internet users to choose
   from a range of providers and methods.  Anything that reduces
   innovation, competition, or user choice raises significant public
   policy concerns.

   Indeed, the need for competition and user choice is perhaps greater



Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


   now than in earlier days of the Internet.  There is a greater
   divergence today in the interests and agendas of users and service
   providers than in the past, and that divergence makes it more
   important that users be able to choose among service providers (in
   part to seek providers that they trust the most).

   [CWSB02] extensively addresses the important need for competition and
   user choice, and provides detailed suggestions and guidelines for
   Internet designer to consider.

4.5.  User Consent

   A familiar public policy concern over user consent focuses on the use
   of personal data (as discussed more fully below under "Privacy").
   The usage here, however, has a broader meaning: the consent (or lack
   of consent) of a user regarding an action or function executed by or
   within the network.

   Many actions performed using IETF protocols require the specific
   initiation by a user, and the user's consent can fairly be assumed.
   Thus, if a user transmits a request using SIP, the Session Initiation
   Protocol, it is safe to assume that the user consents to the normal
   handling and execution of the SIP request.

   Other actions performed using IETF protocols are not initiated by a
   user, but are so inherently a part of normal network operations that
   consent can be assumed.  For example, if in the middle of the network
   certain packets are slowed by congestion, it is safe to assume
   sufficient consent for congestion control mechanisms and rerouting of
   the packets.

   Uncertainty about consent arises, however, in areas where IETF
   protocols can be viewed as deviating from some conception of
   "normal."  A simple example relates to the evolution of caching,
   where as caching of various types of data became the norm, there
   emerged a need to be able to set flags to prevent caching, which in a
   sense can be thought of as a form of negative consent.

   Middle boxes and other functions that deviate from the historic
   "norm" -- the end-to-end principle -- also can raise issues of
   consent.  For example, Section 3 of [RFC3238], titled "IAB
   Architectural and Policy Considerations for Open Pluggable Edge
   Services," explores a range of consent and data integrity issues
   raised by the OPES protocol proposals.  As that analysis makes clear,
   the consent issue is not necessarily confined to the consent of the
   client in a client/server transaction, but may also involve the
   consent of the server to an action undertaken on the request of the
   client.



Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


4.6.  Internationalization

   [RFC3426] calls on protocol designers to ask the key question about
   "Internationalization":

      "Where protocols require elements in text format, have the
      possibly conflicting requirements of global comprehensibility and
      the ability to represent local text content been properly weighed
      against each other?"

   [RFC3426] explores the significant challenges raised by the need to
   balances these conflicting goals, and raises the possibility that the
   historic preference for the use of case-independent ASCII characters
   in protocols may need to change to accommodate a broader set of
   international languages.

4.7.  Accessibility

   The concept of "accessibility" addresses the ability of persons with
   disabilities to use the Internet in general and the full range of
   applications and network functions that are commonly available to
   persons without disabilities.

   The W3C Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) Technical Activity
   illustrates the concern and explains that a focus on accessibility is
   needed "to ensure that the full range of core technologies of the Web
   are accessible . . . .  Barriers exist when these technologies lack
   features needed by users with visual, hearing, physical, cognitive or
   neurological disabilities, or when the accessibility potential in the
   technology is not carried through into the Web application or Web
   content.  For instance, in order for a multimedia presentation to be
   accessible to someone who is blind, the markup language for the
   presentation must support text equivalents for images and video; the
   multimedia player used must support access to the text equivalents;
   and the content author must make appropriate text equivalents
   available.  These text equivalents can then be rendered as speech or
   braille output, enabling access to the content regardless of
   disability or device constraints."

   Many policy concerns about accessibility relate specifically to the
   user interfaces used by applications, and as such these concerns
   generally fall outside of the province of the IETF.  But in the
   Applications Area and to a lesser extent elsewhere within the IETF,
   some design decisions could ultimately constrain the accessibility of
   applications based on IETF protocols.

   The W3C's WAI initiative reflects a very well developed and
   comprehensive analysis of the technical and design issues raised by



Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


   accessibility concerns.

   [Editor's Note: A future version of this document will add text about
   multi-media emergency services support here.]

4.8.  Personal Privacy

   Individual privacy concerns are often divided into two components:
   First, "consumer privacy" (also termed "data protection") commonly
   addresses the right of individuals to control information about
   themselves generated or collected in the course of commercial
   interactions.  Second, "privacy rights vis-a-vis the government"
   addresses individuals' protection against unreasonable government
   intrusions on privacy, including the interceptions of communications.

   In the IETF context, a third category of privacy concern -- privacy
   against private interception of or attacks on data or communications
   -- is largely covered by the IETF's focus on security considerations.
   Although security considerations are crucial to privacy
   considerations, "consumer privacy" and "privacy vis-a-vis the
   government" raise significantly different issues than traditional
   security considerations.  With security considerations, a key focus
   is on maintaining the privacy of information against unauthorized
   attack.  Other forms of privacy, however, focus not on unauthorized
   access to information, but on the "secondary use" of information for
   which access was (at least temporarily) authorized.  The question
   often is not "how can I keep you from seeing my information" but "how
   can I give you my information for one purpose and keep you from using
   it for another."

   The questions raised in Section 5 above do not differentiate between
   the different categories of privacy, because for most purposes within
   the IETF, technologies that create risk for one type of privacy
   likely also create risk for other types of privacy.  Once a potential
   privacy concern is identified, however, the different types of
   privacy concern may present different public policy considerations.
   Indeed, the policy considerations may well be in tension -- a
   technology that permits a lawful governmental interception of a
   communication may also increase the risk of unlawful private
   interception.

   Privacy considerations are too numerous and multifaceted to be
   adequately addressed in this document.  For a more detailed treatment
   please refer to [I-D.morris-privacy-considerations].







Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


4.9.  Privacy vis-a-vis the Government

   Although privacy is internationally recognized as a human right, most
   governments claim the authority to invade privacy through the
   following means, among others:

   o  interception of communications in real-time;

   o  interception of traffic data (routing information) in real-time;

   o  access to data stored by service providers, including traffic data
      being stored for billing purposes; and

   o  access to data stored by users.

   These means of access to communications and stored data should be
   narrowly defined and subject to independent controls under strict
   standards.  Real-time interception of communications should take
   place only with prior approval by the judicial system, issued under
   standards at least as strict as those for police searches of private
   homes.

   In 1999, in the "Raven" discussions, the IETF considered whether it
   should take action to build wiretapping capability into the Internet.
   Ultimately, as detailed in [RFC2804], the community decided that an
   effort to build wiretapping capability into the Internet would create
   significant and unacceptable security risks.
























Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


5.  Questions about Technical Characteristics or Functionality

   In this section we list questions to ask in designing protocols.  The
   issues raised by the questions are discussed in more depth in
   Section 5.  We are not suggesting that each of these questions
   requires an explicit answer -- some questions will be more relevant
   to one design decision than to another.

   There is not a one-to-one correspondence between the questions listed
   in this section and the discussions in Section 5.  Instead, for each
   group of questions listed below, there are one or more references to
   later substantive discussions.

   Some of the questions will be easy to answer for a given technology.
   Others will require creative thinking to assess whether a proposed
   technology might be misused to achieve a result not intended by the
   technology proponents.

   This document addresses the most common and well-known areas of
   public policy concern, focusing on areas most likely to arise in the
   IETF context.

5.1.  Bottlenecks, Choke-Points and Access Control

   o  Would the Technology facilitate any bottlenecks or choke-points in
      the network through which significant amounts of particular types
      of traffic must flow?

   o  Would the Technology permit a Third Party (including a government)
      to exert control over End Users' use of the Internet as a whole?

   o  Would the Technology permit a Transit Provider or Third Party
      (including a government) to exert control over the use of
      particular content, functionality, or resources?

   o  Would the Technology permit an Access Provider or Service Provider
      to exert control over particular content, functionality, or
      resources, other than that known by the End User to be controlled
      by the Access Provider or Service Provider?

   o  Would the Technology permit Third Party (including a government)
      to require that particular content or functionality be confined
      (or "zoned") into, or excluded from, any particular subpart of the
      Internet (such as a particular Global Top Level Domain)?

         See discussions of "Content Censorship and Control", "Personal
         Privacy", "Discrimination Among Users and Content",
         "Competition and Choice", and "User Consent."



Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


5.2.  Alteration or Replacement of Content

   o  Would the Technology permit a Third Party to alter any of the
      content of a communication without (a) the express instruction or
      consent of the Service Provider and the End User, or (b) the
      knowledge of the Service Provider or the End User?

         See discussions of "Content Censorship and Control" and "User
         Consent."

5.3.  Monitoring or Tracking of Usage

   o  Would the Technology permit the monitoring or tracking by a Third
      Party of the use of particular content, functionality, or
      resources?

         See discussion of "Personal Privacy."

5.4.  Retention, Collection, or Exposure of Data

   o  Would the Technology require or permit the retention of any
      information about individual packets or communications, or
      individual End Users, either (a) beyond the conclusion of the
      immediate network or communications event, or (b) for longer than
      a reasonably brief period of time in which a communications
      "session" can be concluded?

   o  Would the Technology permit the reading or writing of any file on
      an End User's computer without the explicit knowledge of the End
      User?

   o  Would the Technology permit or require that information other than
      location and routing information (such as, for example, personal
      information or search terms) be made a part of a URL or URI used
      for a communication?

   o  Would the Technology permit or require that personal or
      confidential information be made available to any Third Party,
      Transit Provider, or Access Provider?

         See discussion of "Personal Privacy."

5.5.  Persistent Identifiers and Anonymity

   o  Would the Technology require or permit the association of a
      persistent identifier with a particular End User, or a computer
      used by one or more End Users?




Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


   o  Would the Technology reduce the ability of a content provider to
      provide content anonymously?

   o  Would the Technology reduce the ability of an End User to access
      content or utilize functionality anonymously?

         See discussion of "Personal Privacy."

5.6.  Access by Third Parties

   o  Would the Technology permit any Third Party to have access to
      packets to and from End Users without the explicit consent of the
      End Users?

   o  Would the Technology permit or require any Third Party to store
      any information about an End User, or an End User's communications
      (even with the knowledge and consent of the End User)?

         See discussions of "Personal Privacy" and "User Consent."

5.7.  Discrimination among Users, or among Types of Traffic

   o  Would the Technology require or permit an Access Provider or
      Transit Provider to provide differing levels of service or
      functionality based on (a) the identity or characteristic of the
      End User, or (b) the type of traffic being handled?

   o  Would the Technology likely lead to a significant increase in cost
      for basic or widely-used categories of communications?

   o  Would likely implementations of a new mode of communication
      require such a financial or resource investment so that the mode
      would effectively not be available to individuals, or small or
      non-profit entities?

         See discussion of "Discrimination Among Users and Content."

5.8.  Internationalization and Accessibility

   o  Would the Technology function with the same level of quality, ease
      of use, etc., across a broad range of languages and character
      sets?

   o  Would the likely implementations of the Technology be as useful to
      mainstream End Users as to non-mainstream End Users (such as, for
      example, End Users with disabilities)?





Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


   o  Would the Technology likely reduce the ability of non-mainstream
      End Users (such as, for example, End Users with disabilities) to
      utilize any common application or network functions?

         See discussions of "Internationalization" and "Accessibility."

5.9.  Innovation, Competition, and End User Choice and Control

   o  Would the Technology reduce the ability of future designers to
      create new and innovative uses of the Internet, or new methods to
      accomplish common network functions?

   o  Would the Technology likely reduce the number of viable
      competitive providers of any common application or network
      functions?

   o  Would the Technology likely reduce the ability of small or poorly-
      funded providers to compete in the provision of any common
      application or network functions?

   o  Would the Technology likely reduce the number or variety of
      methods available to the End User to accomplish common application
      or network functions?

   o  Would the Technology likely reduce the level of control the End
      User can exercise over common application or network functions?

         See discussion of "Competition and Choice."























Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


6.  Security Considerations

   This document does not propose any new protocols or changes to old
   protocols, and therefore does not involve any security considerations
   in that sense.  Many of the privacy issues discussed here also raise
   security issues, but this document is not intended to be a
   comprehensive look at security issues.












































Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.
















































Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


8.  Acknowledgments

   We would like to thank Alan B. Davidson for his work on a prior
   version of this document.















































Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2316]  Bellovin, S., "Report of the IAB Security Architecture
              Workshop", RFC 2316, April 1998.

   [RFC4101]  Rescorla, E. and IAB, "Writing Protocol Models", RFC 4101,
              June 2005.

   [RFC3426]  Floyd, S., "General Architectural and Policy
              Considerations", RFC 3426, November 2002.

   [RFC2464]  Crawford, M., "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over Ethernet
              Networks", RFC 2464, December 1998.

   [RFC3041]  Narten, T. and R. Draves, "Privacy Extensions for
              Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6", RFC 3041,
              January 2001.

   [RFC3238]  Floyd, S. and L. Daigle, "IAB Architectural and Policy
              Considerations for Open Pluggable Edge Services",
              RFC 3238, January 2002.

   [RFC2804]  IAB and IESG, "IETF Policy on Wiretapping", RFC 2804,
              May 2000.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.morris-privacy-considerations]
              Aboba, B., Morris, J., Peterson, J., and H. Tschofenig,
              "Privacy Considerations for Internet Protocols",
              draft-morris-privacy-considerations-00 (work in progress),
              October 2010.

   [CWSB02]   Clark, D., Wroslawski, J., Sollins, K., and R. Braden,
              "Tussle in Cyberspace: Defining Tomorrow's Internet", In
              Proc. ACM SIGCOMM ,
              http://www.acm.org/sigcomm/sigcomm2002/papers/tussle.html,
              2002.

   [OECD]     Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development,
              "OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and
              Transborder Flows of Personal Data", available at
              (September 2010) , http://www.oecd.org/EN/document/
              0,,EN-document-0-nodirectorate-no-24-10255-0,00.html,
              1980.




Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


   [COE02]    Council of Europe, "Additional Protocol to the Convention
              on Cybercrime concerning the criminalisation of acts of a
              racist and xenophobic nature committed through computer
              systems", available at (October 2010) , http://
              www.coe.int/T/E/Legal_affairs/Legal_co-operation/
              Combating_economic_crime/Cybercrime/Racism_on_internet/
              PC-RX(2002)24E-1.pdf, November 2002.

   [COE03]    Council of Europe, "Declaration on freedom of
              communication on the Internet", available at (October
              2010) , http://cm.coe.int/stat/E/Public/2003/
              adopted_texts/declarations/dec-28052003.htm, May 2003.







































Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft            Policy Considerations             October 2010


Authors' Addresses

   John B. Morris, Jr.
   Center for Democracy and Technology
   1634 I Street NW, Suite 1100
   Washington, DC  20006
   USA

   Email: jmorris@cdt.org
   URI:   http://www.cdt.org


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Linnoitustie 6
   Espoo  02600
   Finland

   Phone: +358 (50) 4871445
   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.priv.at


   Bernard Aboba
   Microsoft Corporation
   One Microsoft Way
   Redmond, WA  98052
   US

   Email: bernarda@microsoft.com


   Jon Peterson
   NeuStar, Inc.
   1800 Sutter St Suite 570
   Concord, CA  94520
   US

   Email: jon.peterson@neustar.biz












Morris, et al.           Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 25]


