


Network Working Group                                          M. Hansen
Internet-Draft                                                  ULD Kiel
Intended status: Informational                             H. Tschofenig
Expires: April 9, 2012                            Nokia Siemens Networks
                                                           R. Smith, Ed.
                                                      Cardiff University
                                                         October 7, 2011


                          Privacy Terminology
                  draft-iab-privacy-terminology-00.txt

Abstract

   Privacy is a concept that has been debated and argued throughout the
   last few millennia by all manner of people.  Its most striking
   feature is that nobody seems able to agree upon a precise definition
   of what it actually is.  In order to discuss privacy in any
   meaningful way a tightly defined context needs to be elucidated.  The
   specific context of privacy used within this document is that of
   "personal data", information about an individual stored and/or
   transmitted electronically in Internet protocols.  This context is
   highly relevant since a lot of work within the IETF involves defining
   protocols that can potentially transport (either explicitly or
   implicitly) personal data.

   This document aims to establish a basic lexicon around privacy so
   that IETF contributors who wish to discuss privacy considerations
   within their work can do so using terminology consistent across the
   area.

   Note: This document is discussed at
   https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/ietf-privacy

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."



Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 9, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Setting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Anonymity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Unlinkability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Undetectability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Pseudonymity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     10.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     10.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15




















Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


1.  Introduction

   Privacy is a concept that has been debated and argued throughout the
   last few millennia by all manner of people, including philosophers,
   psychologists, lawyers, and more recently, computer scientists.  Its
   most striking feature is that nobody seems able to agree upon a
   precise definition of what it actually is.  Every individual, every
   group, and every culture have their own different views and
   preconceptions about the concept - some mutually complimentary, some
   distinctly different.  However, it is generally (but not
   unanimously!) agreed that the protection of privacy is "A Good Thing"
   and often, people only realize what it was when they feel that they
   have lost it.

   Even within the specific content of computing and computer science,
   there are still many facets to privacy.  For example, consideration
   of privacy in terms of personal information is distinctly different
   from consideration of privacy in a geographical information sense: in
   the former a loss of privacy might be framed as the uncontrolled
   release of personal information without the subject's consent, while
   in the latter it might be the ability to compute the location of an
   individual beyond a certain degree of accuracy.

   In order to discuss privacy in any meaningful way a tightly defined
   context needs to be elucidated.  The specific context of privacy used
   within this document is that of "personal data", information about an
   individual stored and/or transmitted electronically in Internet
   protocols.  This context is highly relevant since a lot of work
   within the IETF involves defining protocols that can potentially
   transport (either explicitly or implicitly) personal data and can
   therefore either, by dint of design decisions when creating them,
   enable either privacy protection or result in privacy breaches.  In
   this specific context, discussions of privacy largely centre around
   the collection minimisation, the usage, and release of such personal
   data.

   Work in this area of privacy and privacy protection over the last few
   decades has centred on the idea of data minimization; it uses
   terminologies such as anonymity, unlinkability, unobservability, and
   pseudonymity.  These terms are often used in discussions about the
   privacy properties of systems.

   The core principal of data minimization is that the ability for
   others to collect any personal data should be removed.  Often,
   however, the collection of personal data cannot not be prevented
   entirely, in which case the goal is to minimize the amount of
   personal data that can be collected for a given purpose and to offer
   ways to control the dissemination of personal data.



Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


   Data minimization is the only generic strategy to enhance individual
   privacy in cases where valid personal information is used.  Other
   techniques have been proposed and implemented that aim to enhance
   privacy by providing misinformation (inaccurate or erroneous
   information, provided usually without conscious effort to mislead or
   deceive) or disinformation (deliberately false or distorted
   information provided in order to mislead or deceive).  However, these
   techniques are out of scope for this document.  Data minimization is
   also the only generic strategy to enable unlinkability if we are
   excluding providing misinformation or disinformation, since all valid
   personal data inherently provides some linkability.

   Thus, this document aims to establish a basic lexicon around privacy
   so that IETF contributors who wish to discuss privacy considerations
   within their work can do so using terminology consistent across the
   area.  Note that it does not attempt to define all terminology,
   rather it just establishes terms to some of the most common ideas and
   concepts.  The hope is that this will facilitate document authors to
   more easily discuss privacy considerations of their work.
































Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


2.  Setting

   To keep the setting as simple as possible, usually, we do not
   distinguish between a human who uses some software and the actual
   computer program.  Usually, we assume that there is a one-to-one
   relationship between the device running the software that is the
   scope of Internet protocol development and the human being using that
   software.

   There are various cases when this human-to-software link is not one-
   to-one.  Protocols developed in the IETF typically do not mandate any
   specific relationship to exist but the typically envisioned uses for
   a specific protocol may reveal those relationships.  For example,
   multiple hosts used by different persons may be attached to an
   Internet gateway in a household and from the Internet Service
   Provider point of view all these devices belong to a single person,
   the subscriber, which whom the contract was established.  Unless
   there are good reasons to highlight more the more complex one-to-many
   relationship we suggest to focus the description on the simpler
   relationship only for editorial reasons.

   When necessary we use the term initiator and responder to refer to
   the communication interaction of a protocol.  The initiator and
   responder terminology is used to particularly reflect that many
   protocols utilize bidirectional communication where both ends send
   and receive data.

   We assume that the attacker uses all information available to infer
   (probabilities of) his items of interest (IOIs).  These IOIs may be
   attributes (and their values) of personal data or actions like who
   did send or receive which messages.




















Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


3.  Anonymity

   To enable anonymity of a subject, there always has to be an
   appropriate set of subjects with potentially the same attributes.

   Definition:  Anonymity of a subject from an attacker's perspective
      means that the attacker cannot sufficiently identify the subject
      within a set of subjects, the anonymity set.

   The anonymity set is the set of all possible subjects and may vary
   over time.  The set of possible subjects depends on the knowledge of
   the attacker.  Thus, anonymity is relative with respect to the
   attacker.  Therefore, an initiator may be anonymous (initiator
   anonymity) only within a set of potential initiators, his/her
   initiator anonymity set, which itself may be a subset of all subjects
   who may send a message.  The same for the responder means that a
   responder may be anonymous (responder anonymity) only within a set of
   potential responders, his/her responser anonymity set.  Both
   anonymity sets may be disjoint, be the same, or they may overlap.

      As an example consider RFC 3325 (P-Asserted-Identity) [RFC3325],
      an extension to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP), that allows
      subjects, e.g. a voice over IP caller, to instruct a trusted
      intermediary not to populate the SIP From header field based on
      the authenticated and verified identity of the caller.  The
      receipient of the call, as well as any other entity outside the
      trust domain with which the user authenticated would therefore
      only learn that the SIP message (typically a SIP INVITE) was sent
      with a header field 'From: "Anonymous"
      <sip:anonymous@anonymous.invalid>' (unless further information can
      be inferred from the other SIP protocol payloads) rather than the
      subject's real name or the subject's pseudonym (depending on the
      configuration).


















Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


4.  Unlinkability

   Definition:  Unlinkability of two or more items of interest (IOIs,
      e.g., subjects, messages, actions, ...) from an attacker's
      perspective means that within the system (comprising these and
      possibly other items), the attacker cannot sufficiently
      distinguish whether these IOIs are related or not.

   Please note that unlinkability of two (or more) messages of course
   may depend on whether their content is protected against the attacker
   considered.  In particular, messages may be unlinkable if we assume
   that the attacker is not able to get information on the initiator or
   responder from the message content.  Yet with access to their content
   even without deep semantical analysis the attacker can notice certain
   characteristics which link them together, e.g., similarities in
   structure, style, use of some words or phrases, consistent appearance
   of some grammatical errors, etc.

   The unlinkability property can be considered as a more "fine-grained"
   version of anonymity since there are many more relations where
   unlinkability might be an issue than just the relation "anonymity"
   between subjects and IOIs.  Therefore, the attacker might get to know
   information on linkability while not necessarily reducing anonymity
   of the particular subject.  An example might be that the attacker, in
   spite of being able to link all encrypted messages in a transactions,
   does not learn who is doing this transaction.

   Definition:  We use the term "profiling" to mean learning information
      about an anonymous subject's activities without necessarily
      linking them to any specific transaction.  For example, if an
      attacker concludes that a subject plays a specific computer game,
      reads specific news article on a website, and uploads videos, then
      the subjects activities have been profiled, even if the attacker
      is unable to identify a specific subject.

   Sometimes it is necessary to make it explicit what attributes
   anonymity refers to (beyond the subject to IOI relationship).  For
   example, it may be useful to highlight that there is anonymity of the
   initiator in the sense that no message can be linked to this
   initiator.

   Relationship anonymity of a pair of subjects, means that sender and
   recipient (or each recipient in case of multicast) are unlinkable.
   The classical MIX-net [Chau81] without dummy traffic is one
   implementation with just this property: The attacker sees who sends
   messages when and who receives messages when, but cannot figure out
   who sends messages to whom.




Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


   Definition:  The term "unlinkable session" refers the ability of the
      system to render a set of actions by a subject unlinkable from one
      another.


   Definition:  We refer as a "linking identifier" to any parameter P
      that an attacker can observe about an IOI and use to link it to
      similar IOIs that have similar values for P. For example, the
      window size header transmitted in a typical HTTP request is a
      linking identifier.









































Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


5.  Undetectability

   In contrast to anonymity and unlinkability, where not the IOI, but
   only its relationship to subjects or other IOIs is protected, for
   undetectability, the IOIs are protected as such.  Undetectability can
   be regarded as a possible and desirable property of steganographic
   systems.  In contrast, anonymity, dealing with the relationship of
   discernible IOIs to subjects, does not directly fit into that
   terminology, but independently represents a different dimension of
   properties.

   Definition:  Undetectability of an item of interest (IOI) from an
      attacker's perspective means that the attacker cannot sufficiently
      distinguish whether it exists or not.

   If we consider messages as IOIs, this means that messages are not
   sufficiently discernible from, e.g., "random noise".


































Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


6.  Pseudonymity

   Having anonymity of human beings, unlinkability, and maybe
   unobservability is superb w.r.t. data minimization, but would prevent
   any useful two-way communication.  For many applications, we need
   appropriate kinds of identifiers.  These identifiers are then used to
   refer to established state or are used for access control purposes.
   An identifier is defined in [id] as "a lexical token that names
   entities".

   Definition:  A pseudonym is an identifier of a subject other than one
      of the subject's real names.

   The term 'real name' is the antonym to "pseudonym".  There may be
   multiple real names over lifetime, in particular the legal names,
   i.e., for a human being the names which appear on the birth
   certificate or on other official identity documents issued by the
   State; for a legal person the name under which it operates and which
   is registered in official registers (e.g., commercial register or
   register of associations).  A human being's real name typically
   comprises their given name and a family name.  Note that from a mere
   technological perspective it cannot always be determined whether an
   identifier of a subject is a pseudonym or a real name.

   Additional useful terms are:

   Definition:  The subject which the pseudonym refers to is the holder
      of the pseudonym.


   Definition:  A subject is pseudonymous if a pseudonym is used as
      identifier instead of one of its real names.


   Definition:  Pseudonymity is the use of pseudonyms as identifiers.

   So sender pseudonymity is defined as the sender being pseudonymous,
   recipient pseudonymity is defined as the recipient being
   pseudonymous.

   In order to be useful in the context of Internet communication we use
   the term digital pseudonym and declare it as a pseudonym that is
   suitable to be used to authenticate the holder's IOIs.

   Anonymity is the stronger, ...

   o  the less personal data of the pseudonym holder can be linked to
      the pseudonym;



Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


   o  the less often and the less context-spanning pseudonyms are used
      and therefore the less data about the holder can be linked;

   o  the more often independently chosen, i.e., from an observer's
      perspective unlinkable, pseudonyms are used for new actions.

   For Internet protocols it is important what the lifetime of the
   pseudonyms is, to whom they get exposed to, how subjects are able to
   influence disclosure, and how often they can be changed over time.










































Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


7.  Acknowledgments

   Parts of this document utilize content from [anon_terminology], which
   had a long history starting at 2000 and a number of people helped to
   improve the quality of the document with their feedback.  The authors
   would like to thank Andreas Pfitzmann for his work on an earlier
   draft version of this document.

   Within the IETF a number of persons had provided their feedback to
   this document.  We would like to thank Scott Brim, Marc Linsner,
   Bryan McLaughlin, Nick Mathewson, Eric Rescorla, Alissa Cooper, Scott
   Bradner, Nat Sakimura, Bjoern Hoehrmann, David Singer, Dean Willis,
   Christine Runnegar, Lucy Lynch, Trend Adams, Mark Lizar, Martin
   Thomson, Josh Howlett, and Mischa Tuffield.





































Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


8.  Security Considerations

   This document introduces terminology for talking about privacy in
   IETF specifications.  Since privacy protection relies on security
   mechanisms this document is also related to security in a broader
   context.













































Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


9.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.
















































Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [id]                "Identifier - Wikipeadia", Wikipedia , 2011.

10.2.  Informative References

   [Chau81]            Chaum, D., "Untraceable Electronic Mail, Return
                       Addresses, and Digital Pseudonyms",
                       Communications of the ACM , 24/2, 84-88, 1981.

   [RFC3325]           Jennings, C., Peterson, J., and M. Watson,
                       "Private Extensions to the Session Initiation
                       Protocol (SIP) for Asserted Identity within
                       Trusted Networks", RFC 3325, November 2002.

   [anon_terminology]  Pfitzmann, A. and A. Pfitzmann, "A terminology
                       for talking about privacy by data minimization:
                       Anonymity, Unlinkability, Undetectability,
                       Unobservability,  Pseudonymity, and Identity
                       Management", URL: http://dud.inf.tu-dresden.de/
                       literatur/Anon_Terminology_v0.34.pdf , version
                       034, 2010.



























Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             Privacy Terminology              October 2011


Authors' Addresses

   Marit Hansen
   ULD Kiel

   EMail: marit.hansen@datenschutzzentrum.de


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Linnoitustie 6
   Espoo  02600
   Finland

   Phone: +358 (50) 4871445
   EMail: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.priv.at


   Rhys Smith (editor)
   Cardiff University

   EMail: smith@cardiff.ac.uk




























Hansen, et al.            Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 16]

