


Network Working Group                                       C. Lumbreras
Internet-Draft                                 European Emergency Number
Intended status: Standards Track                      Association (EENA)
Expires: March 30, 2013                                    H. Tschofenig
                                                      September 26, 2012


    Uniform Resource Name (URN) Namespace for the European Emergency
                                Services
                     draft-lumbreras-ees-urn-00.txt

Abstract

   This document describes the Namespace Identifier (NID) "eena" for
   Uniform Resource Name (URN) resources published by the European
   Emergency Number Association (EENA).  EENA defines and manages
   resources that utilize this URN model.  Management activities for
   these and other resource types are provided by the European Emergency
   Services Registry (EESR).

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 30, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Lumbreras & Tschofenig   Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              URN EES Namespace             September 2012


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  URN Specification for 'ees' NID  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Namespace Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Community Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14


































Lumbreras & Tschofenig   Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              URN EES Namespace             September 2012


1.  Introduction

   The European Emergency Number Association (EENA) is currently in the
   process of setting standards, processes, and procedures for the use
   of an IP-based Emergency Services IP Network (ESInet) for all public
   safety entities in Europe.  Some of the solutions being developed by
   EENA require namespaces that are managed so that they are unique and
   persistent.  To assure that the uniqueness is absolute, the
   registration of a specific Uniform Resource Name (URN) [RFC2141]
   Namespace ID (NID) for use by EENA is required.  This document
   defines and registers such a namespace in accordance with the
   procedures in [RFC3406].







































Lumbreras & Tschofenig   Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              URN EES Namespace             September 2012


2.  URN Specification for 'ees' NID

      Namespace ID: ees

      Registration information:


         Registration version number: 1

         Registration date: 2012-09-26

      Declared registrant of the namespace:


         Registering organization

         Name: European Emergency Number Association (EENA)

         Address:


            Avenue de la Toison d'Or 79,

            1060 Brussels

            Belgium

      Designated contact:


         Role: European Emergency Services Registry Administrator

         Email: eesr-admin@eena.org

      Declaration of syntactic structure:

      The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs that use the
      "eena" NID will have the following structure: {EESclass}:
      {ClassSpecificString}

      The "EESclass" conforms to the URN syntax requirements [RFC2141]
      and defines a specific class of resource type.  Each class will
      have a specific labeling scheme that is covered by
      "ClassSpecificString", which also conforms to the naming
      requirements of [RFC2141].

      EENA maintains a naming authority, the European Emergency Service
      Registry (EESR), that will manage the assignment of "EESclass" and



Lumbreras & Tschofenig   Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              URN EES Namespace             September 2012


      the specific registration values assigned for each class.  Other
      EENA standards documents will define the "ClassSpecificStrings"
      for a given "EESclass".

      Relevant ancillary documentation:

      The European Emergency Service Registry (EESR) provides
      information on the registered resources and the registrations for
      each.  More information about the EESR and the registration
      activities and procedures to be followed are defined in "EENA
      Registry System Standard", TBD, which is available at
      http://www.eena.org/.

      Identifier uniqueness considerations:

      The EESR will manage resources using the "ees" NID and will be the
      authority for managing the resources and subsequent strings
      associated.  The EESR shall ensure the uniqueness of all ees URNs
      by checking such names against the list of existing namespace
      names, as documented in TBD.

      Identifier persistence considerations:

      The EESR will provide clear documentation of the registered uses
      of the "ees" NID.  The EESR will establish a registry for
      "EESclass", as defined in TBD.  Each "EESclass" will have a
      separate description in the registry and may have its own sub-
      registry.  In particular, new "EESclass" registry entries will
      require a full EENA Technical Standard document.

      The EESR will maintain a website at a stable address that provides
      XML and text renderings of the urn:ees registry.

      Process of identifier assignment:

      The EESR processes and procedures for identifier assignment are
      documented in TBD.  The registry that will control the urn:ees
      namespace is defined in TBD.  In particular, assignments to the
      "EESclass" registry will require a EENA Technical Standard
      document.  Subregistries for particular "EENAclasses" may be
      established by such technical standards.  Subregistries may be
      defined to have more liberal management policies as defined in
      TBD, but must be EESR managed and will not be permitted to be
      delegated to any other organization or registry.  Thus, the EESR
      will manage the entire urn:ees tree.

      Process for identifier resolution:




Lumbreras & Tschofenig   Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              URN EES Namespace             September 2012


      The namespace is not currently listed with a Resolution Discovery
      System (RDS), but nothing about the namespace prohibits the future
      definition of appropriate resolution methods or listing with an
      RDS.

      Rules for lexical equivalence:

      No special considerations; the rules for lexical equivalence of
      [RFC2141] apply.

      Conformance with URN syntax:

      No special considerations.

      Validation mechanism:

      None specified.  URN assignment will be handled by procedures
      implemented in support of EENA activities.

      Scope:

      Global





























Lumbreras & Tschofenig   Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              URN EES Namespace             September 2012


3.  Examples

   The following examples are representative URNs that could be assigned
   by the ERS.  They may not be the actual strings that would be
   assigned.

   Resource "psaproute"

   Syntax: "urn:ees:emergencyresponders:<responder name>"

   ResourceSpecificString: simple string with name of responder, defined
   in a subregistry

   Use: Defines the URN to be used for queries to an NG112 Emergency
   Call Routing Function that provides URIs for responding agencies.

   Examples:

   urn:ees:emergencyresponders:ambulance

   urn:ees:emergencyresponders:fire

   urn:ees:emergencyresponders:police

   urn:ees:emergencyresponders:poison

   urn:ees:emergencyresponders:coastguard

   urn:ees:emergencyresponders:marine






















Lumbreras & Tschofenig   Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              URN EES Namespace             September 2012


4.  Namespace Considerations

   The European Emergency Number Association is a Brussels-based NGO set
   up in 1999 dedicated to promoting high-quality emergency services
   reached by the number 112 throughout the EU.  EENA serves as a
   discussion platform for emergency services, public authorities,
   decision makers, associations and solution providers in view of
   improving emergency response in accordance with citizens'
   requirements.  EENA is also promoting the establishment of an
   efficient system for alerting citizens about imminent or developing
   emergencies.

   The EENA memberships include about 655 emergency services
   representatives from 43 European countries, 56 solution providers, 9
   international associations/organisations as well as 26 Members of the
   European Parliament.

   EENA members do their work in committees, which also includes a
   technical committee that develops a variety of applications and
   services using Internet protocols built upon IETF standards.  Some of
   these services require that supporting information (e.g., data
   descriptions, attributes, etc.) be fully specified.  For proper
   operation, descriptions of the needed supporting information must
   exist and be available in a unique, reliable, and persistent manner.
   These dependencies provide the basis of the need for namespaces, in
   one form or another, and will enable EENA to define URNs that are to
   assign cleaner, more general, more permanent, more reliable, and more
   controllable namespace names related to EENA standards, while keeping
   URNs defined by EENA properly separate from the IETF-defined URNs.

   As the European Emergency Number Association work is ongoing and
   covers many technical areas, the possibility of binding to various
   other namespace repositories has been deemed impractical.  Each
   object or description, as defined in EENA, could possibly be related
   to multiple different namespaces, so further conflicts of association
   could occur.  Thus, the intent is to utilize the European Emergency
   Services Registry, operated by EENA, as the naming authority for
   EENA-defined objects and descriptions.













Lumbreras & Tschofenig   Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              URN EES Namespace             September 2012


5.  Community Considerations

   The European public safety organizations will benefit from
   publication of this namespace by having permanent and reliable URNs
   to be used with protocols defined by EENA.  The objects and
   descriptions required for services defined by EENA are generally
   available for use by other organizations.  The European Emergency
   Number Association will provide access and support for name requests
   by these organizations within the constraints of the defined ERS
   processes and the specific urn:eena registry and subregistries.  This
   support can be enabled in a timely and responsive fashion as new
   objects and descriptions are produced.  These will be enabled in a
   fashion similar to current IANA processes, as documented in TBD.

   The EESR establishes registries when called for in a EENA Technical
   Standard.  Such standards must provide clear and concise instructions
   on creating and maintaining such registries.  Defined management
   policies include "EENA Technical Standard Required", "EENA Document
   Required", "Expert Review", and "First Come First Served", which
   correspond to similar IANA management policies.  EENA is establishing
   a website that provides controlled entry of new registries and
   entries in registries, and automatically produces HTML and XML
   descriptions of registry contents that are used by vendors and other
   consumers of the content.



























Lumbreras & Tschofenig   Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              URN EES Namespace             September 2012


6.  Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations other than those
   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.















































Lumbreras & Tschofenig   Expires March 30, 2013                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              URN EES Namespace             September 2012


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document adds a new entry in the URN Namespaces registry.  The
   namespace is "eena".  The defining document is this RFC.  The entry
   can be found in the Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespaces registry
   available from http://www.iana.org and any associated mirrors.













































Lumbreras & Tschofenig   Expires March 30, 2013                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              URN EES Namespace             September 2012


8.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank Brian Rosen for his work on RFC 6061.  We have
   re-used his writeup since it aims to accomplish the same goal.  His
   work was focused on the National Emergency Number Association, a
   partner organization of EENA.













































Lumbreras & Tschofenig   Expires March 30, 2013                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              URN EES Namespace             September 2012


9.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", March 1997.

   [RFC2141]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [RFC3406]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R., and P. Faltstrom,
              "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace Definition
              Mechanisms", BCP 66, RFC 3406, October 2002.









































Lumbreras & Tschofenig   Expires March 30, 2013                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              URN EES Namespace             September 2012


Authors' Addresses

   Cristina Lumbreras
   European Emergency Number Association (EENA)
   Linnoitustie 6
   Espoo  02600
   Finland

   Phone: +358 (50) 4871445
   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.priv.at


   Hannes Tschofenig


   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net


































Lumbreras & Tschofenig   Expires March 30, 2013                [Page 14]

